


                       The Watter's Mou'

                             By

                         Bram Stoker


                          Chapter I

It threatened to be a wild night. All day banks of sea-fog had 
come and gone, sweeping on shore with the south-east wind, which 
is so fatal at Cruden Bay, and indeed all along the coast of 
Aberdeenshire, and losing themselves in the breezy expanses of 
the high uplands beyond. As yet the wind only came in puffs, 
followed by intervals of ominous calm; but the barometer had 
been falling for days, and the sky had on the previous night 
been streaked with great "mare's-tails" running in the direction 
of the dangerous wind. Up to early morning the wind had been 
south-westerly, but had then "backed" to south-east; and the 
sudden change, no less than the backing, was ominous indeed. 
From the waste of sea came a ceaseless muffled roar, which seemed 
loudest and most full of dangerous import when it came through 
the mystery of the driving fog. Whenever the fog-belts would lift 
or disperse, or disappear inland before the gusts of wind, the 
sea would look as though swept with growing anger; for though 
there were neither big waves as during a storm, nor a great swell 
as after one, all the surface of the water as far as the eye 
could reach was covered with little waves tipped with white. 
Closer together grew these waves as the day wore on, the angrier 
ever the curl of the white water where they broke. In the North 
Sea it does not take long for the waves to rise; and all along 
the eastern edge of Buchan it was taken for granted that there 
would be wild work on the coast before the night was over.

   In the little look-out house on the top of the cliff over 
the tiny harbour of Port Erroll the coastguard on duty was 
pacing rapidly to and fro. Every now and again he would pause, 
and lifting a field-glass from the desk, sweep the horizon from 
Girdleness at the south of Aberdeen, when the lifting of the 
mist would let him see beyond the Scaurs, away to the north, 
where the high cranes of the Blackman quarries at Murdoch Head 
seemed to cleave the sky like gigantic gallows-trees.

   He was manifestly in high spirits, and from the manner in which, 
one after another, he looked again and again at the Martini-Henry 
rifle in the rack, the navy revolver stuck muzzle down on a spike, 
and the cutlass in its sheath hanging on the wall, it was easy to 
see that his interest arose from something connected with his work 
as a coastguard. On the desk lay an open telegram smoothed down 
by his hard hands, with the brown envelope lying beside it. It 
gave some sort of clue to his excitement, although it did not go 
into detail. "Keep careful watch tonight; run expected; spare no 
efforts; most important."

   William Barrow, popularly known as Sailor Willy, was a very 
young man to be a chief boatman in the preventive service, albeit 
that his station was one of the smallest on the coast. He had been 
allowed, as a reward for saving the life of his lieutenant, to 
join the coast service, and had been promoted to chief boatman as 
a further reward for a clever capture of smugglers, wherein he 
had shown not only great bravery, but much ability and power of 
rapid organisation.  

   The Aberdeen coast is an important one in the way of guarding 
on account of the vast number of fishing-smacks which, during the 
season, work from Peterhead up and down the coast, and away on the 
North Sea right to the shores of Germany and Holland. This vast 
coming and going affords endless opportunities for smuggling; and, 
despite of all vigilance, a considerable amount of "stuff" finds 
its way to the consumers without the formality of the Custom House. 
The fish traffic is a quick traffic, and its returns come all at 
once, so that a truly enormous staff would be requisite to examine 
adequately the thousand fish-smacks which use the harbour of 
Peterhead, and on Sundays pack its basins with a solid mass of 
boats. The coast-line for some forty miles south is favourable for 
this illicit traffic. The gneiss and granite formations broken up 
by every convulsion of nature, and worn by the strain and toil of 
ages into every conceivable form of rocky beauty, offers an endless 
variety of narrow creeks and bays where the daring, to whom the 
rocks and the currents and the tides are known, may find secret 
entrance and speedy exit for their craft. This season the smuggling 
had been chiefly of an overt kind - that is, the goods had been 
brought into the harbour amongst the fish and nets, and had been 
taken through the streets under the eyes of the unsuspecting 
Customs officers. Some of these takes were so large, that the
authorities had made up their minds that there must be a great 
amount of smuggling going on. The secret agents in the German, 
Dutch, Flemish, and French ports were asked to make extra exertions 
in discovering the amount of the illicit trade, and their later 
reports were of an almost alarming nature. They said that really 
vast amounts of tobacco, brandy, rum, silks, laces, and all sorts 
of excisable commodities were being secretly shipped in the British 
fishing-fleet; and as only a very small proportion of this was 
discovered, it was manifest that smuggling to a large extent 
was once more to the fore. Accordingly precautions were doubled 
all along the east coast frequented by the fishing-fleets. Not 
only were the coastguards warned of the danger and cautioned 
against devices which might keep them from their work at critical 
times, but they were apprised of every new shipment as reported 
from abroad. Furthermore, the detectives of the service were sent 
about to parts where the men were suspected of laxity-or worse.

   Thus it was that Sailor Willy, with the experience of two 
promotions for cause, and with the sense of responsibility 
which belonged to his office, felt in every way elated at the 
possibility of some daring work before him. He knew, of course, 
that a similar telegram had been received at every station 
on the coast, and that the chance of an attempt being made in 
Cruden Bay or its surroundings was a small one; but he was young 
and brave and hopeful, and with an adamantine sense of integrity 
to support him in his work. It was unfortunate that his comrade 
was absent, ill in the hospital at Aberdeen, and that the strain 
at present on the service, together with the men away on annual 
training and in the naval manoeuvres, did not permit of a 
substitute being sent to him. However, he felt strong enough 
to undertake any amount of duty - he was strong enough and 
handsome enough to have a good opinion of himself, and too 
brave and too sensible to let his head be turned by vanity.

   As he walked to and fro there was in the distance of his mind - 
in that dim background against which in a man's mind a woman's form 
finds suitable projection - some sort of vague hope that a wild 
dream of rising in the world might be some time realised. He knew 
that every precaution in his power had been already taken, and felt 
that he could indulge in fancies without detriment to his work. He 
had signalled the coastguard at Whinnyfold on the south side of the 
Bay, and they had exchanged ideas by means of the signal language.
His appliances for further signalling by day or night were in 
perfect order, and he had been right over his whole boundary since 
he had received the telegram seeing that all things were in order. 
Willy Barrow was not one to leave things to chance where duty was 
concerned.

   His day-dreams were not all selfish. They were at least so far 
unselfish that the results were to be shared with another; for 
Willy Barrow was engaged to be married. Maggie MacWhirter was the 
daughter of an old fisherman who had seen days more prosperous 
than the present. He had once on a time owned a fishing-smack, 
but by degrees he had been compelled to borrow on her, till now, 
when, although he was nominal owner, the boat was so heavily 
mortgaged that at any moment he might lose his entire possession. 
That such an event was not unlikely was manifest, for the mortgagee 
was no other than Solomon Mendoza of Hamburg and Aberdeen, who 
had changed in like manner the ownership of a hundred boats, and 
who had the reputation of being as remorseless as he was rich. 
MacWhirter had long been a widower, and Maggie since a little girl 
had kept house for her father and her two brothers, Andrew and 
Niel. Andrew was twenty-seven - six years older than Maggie - 
and Niel had just turned twenty. The elder brother was a quiet, 
self-contained, hard-working man, who now and again manifested 
great determination, though generally at unexpected times; the 
younger was rash, impetuous, and passionate, and though in his 
moments of quiescence more tender to those he cared for than 
was usual with men of his class, he was a never-ending source 
of anxiety to his father and his sister. Andrew, or Sandy as he 
was always called, took him with consistent quietness.

   The present year, although a good one in the main, had been 
but poor for MacWhirter's boat. Never once had he had a good 
take of fish - not one-half the number of crans of the best boat; 
and the season was so far advanced, and the supply had been so 
plentiful, that a few days before, the notice had been up at 
Peterhead that after the following week the buyers would not 
take any more herring.

   This notice naturally caused much excitement, and the whole 
fishing industry determined to make every effort to improve the 
shining hours left to them. Exertions were on all sides redoubled, 
and on sea and shore there was little idleness. Naturally the 
smuggling interest bestirred itself too; its chance for the year 
was in the rush and bustle and hurry of the coming and going fleet, 
and anything held over for a chance had to be ventured now or left 
over for a year - which might mean indefinitely. Great ventures 
were therefore taken by some of the boats; and from their daring 
the authorities concluded that either heavy bribes were given, or 
else that the goods were provided by others than the fishermen 
who undertook to run them. A few important seizures, however, made 
the men wary; and it was understood from the less frequent but 
greater importance of the seizures, that the price for "running" 
had greatly gone up. There was much passionate excitement amongst 
those who were found out and their friends, and a general wish to 
discover the informers. Some of the smuggling fishermen at first 
refused to pay the fines until they were told who had informed. 
This position being unsupportable, they had instead paid the fines 
and cherished hatred in their hearts. Some of the more reckless 
and turbulent spirits had declared their intention of avenging 
themselves on the informers when they should be known. It was only 
natural that this feeling of rage should extend to the Customs 
officers and men of the preventive service, who stood between the 
unscrupulous adventurers and their harvest; and altogether matters 
had become somewhat strained between the fishermen and the 
authorities.

   The Port Erroll boats, like those from Collieston, were all 
up at Peterhead, and of course amongst them MacWhirter's boat 
the Sea Gull with her skipper and his two sons. It Was now Friday 
night, and the boats had been out for several days, so that it 
was pretty certain that there would be a full harbor at Peterhead 
on the Saturday. A marriage had been arranged to take place this 
evening between Thomas Keith of Boddam and Alice MacDonald, whose 
father kept the public-house The Jamie Fleeman on the northern edge 
of the Erroll estate. Though the occasion was to be a grand one, 
the notice of it had been short indeed. It was said by the bride's 
friends that it had been fixed so hurriedly because the notice of 
the closing of the fishing season had been so suddenly given out at 
Peterhead. Truth to tell, some sort of explanation was necessary, 
for it was only on Wednesday morning that word had been sent to 
the guests, and as these came from all sorts of places between 
Peterhead and Collieston, and taking a sweep of some ten miles 
inland, there was need of some preparation. The affair was to 
top all that had ever been seen at Port Erroll, and as The Jamie 
Fleeman was but a tiny place - nothing, in fact, but a wayside 
public-house - it was arranged that it was to take place in the 
new barn and storehouses Matthew Beagrie had just built on the 
inner side of the sandhills, where they came close to the Water 
of Cruden.

   Throughout all the east side of Buchan there had for some 
time existed a wonder amongst the quiet-going people as to the 
strange prosperity of MacDonald. His public-house had, of course, 
a practical monopoly; for as there was not a licensed house on 
the Erroll estate, and as his was the nearest house of call to 
the port, he naturally got what custom there was going. The 
fishermen all along the coast for some seven or eight miles 
went to him either to drink or to get their liquor for drinking 
elsewhere; and not a few of the Collieston men on their Saturday 
journey home from Peterhead and their Sunday journey out there 
again made a detour to have a glass and a chat and a pipe, if 
time permitted, with "Tammas Mac" - for such was his sobriquet. 
To the authorities he and his house were also sources of interest; 
for there was some kind of suspicion that some of the excellent 
brandy and cigars which he dispensed had arrived by a simpler road 
than that through the Custom House. It was at this house, in 
the good old days of smuggling, that the coastguards used to be 
entertained when a run was on foot, and where they slept off 
their drunkenness whilst the cargoes were being hidden or taken 
inland in the ready carts. Of course all this state of things 
had been altered, and there was as improved a decorum amongst 
the smugglers as there was a sterner rule and discipline amongst 
the coastguards. It was many a long year since Philip Kennedy 
met his death at Kirkton at the hands of the exciseman Anderson. 
Comparatively innocent deception was now the smugglers' only 
wile.

   Tonight the whole country-side was to be at the wedding, and 
the dance which was to follow it; and for this occasion the lion 
was to lie down with the lamb, for the coastguards were bidden to 
the feast with the rest. Sailor Willy had looked forward to the 
dance with delight, for Maggie was to be there, and on the Billy 
Ruffian, which had been his last ship, he had been looked on as 
the best dancer before the mast. If there be any man who shuns 
a dance in which he knows he can shine, and at which his own 
particular girl is to be present, that man is not to be found 
in the Royal Naval Marine, even amongst those of them who have 
joined in the preventive service. Maggie was no less delighted, 
although she had a source of grief which for the present she 
had kept all to herself. Her father had of late been much 
disturbed about affairs. He had not spoken of them to her, and 
she did not dare to mention the matter to him; for old MacWhirter 
was a closemouthed man, and did not exchange many confidences 
even with his own children. But Maggie guessed at the cause of 
the sadness - of the down-bent head when none were looking; the 
sleepless nights and the deep smothered groans which now and 
again marked his heavy sleep told the tale loudly enough to reach 
the daughter's ears. For the last few weeks, whenever her father 
was at home, Maggie had herself lain awake listening, listening, 
in increasing agony of spirit, for one of these half moans or for 
the sound of the tossing of the restless man. He was as gentle
and kind to his daughter as ever; but on his leaving the last 
time there had been an omission on his part which troubled her 
to the quick. For the first time in his life he had not kissed 
her as he went away.

   On the previous day Sailor Willy had said he would come to the 
wedding and the dance if his duties should permit him; and, when 
asked if he could spare a few rockets for the occasion, promised 
that he would let off three Board of Trade rockets, which he could 
now deal with as it was three months since he had used any. He 
was delighted at the opportunity of meeting the fisherfolk and his 
neighbours; for his officers had impressed on him the need of being 
on good terms with all around him, both for the possibility which 
it would always afford him of knowing how things were going on, 
and for the benefit of the rocket-service whenever there might be 
need of willing hands and hearts to work with him, for in the Board 
of Trade rocket-service much depends on voluntary aid. That very 
afternoon he had fixed the rockets on the wall of the barn with 
staples, so that he could fire them from below with a slow match, 
which he fixed ready. When he had got the telegram he had called 
in to Maggie and told her if he did not come to fetch her she was 
to go on to the wedding by herself, and that he would try to join 
her later. She had appeared a little startled when he told her he 
might not be present; but after a pause smiled, and said she would 
go, and that he was not to lose any time coming when he was free.
Now that every arrangement was complete, and as he had between 
puffs of the sea-fog got a clean sweep of the horizon and saw that 
there was no sail of any kind within sight, he thought he might 
have a look through the village and keep in evidence so as not to 
create any suspicion in the minds of the people. As he went through 
the street he noticed that nearly every house door was closed - 
all the women were at the new barn. It was now eight o'clock, and 
the darkness, which is slow of coming in the North, was closing 
in. Down by the barn there were quite a number of carts, and the 
horses had not been taken out, though the wedding was not to be 
till nine o'clock, or perhaps even later; for Mrs MacDonald had 
taken care to tell her friends that Keith might not get over from 
Boddam till late. Willy looked at the carts carefully - some idea 
seemed to have struck him. Their lettering shewed them to be from 
all parts round, and the names mostly of those who had not the 
best reputation. When his brief survey was finished he looked 
round and then went swiftly behind the barn so that no one might 
see him. As he went he muttered reflectively:   

   "Too many light carts and fast horses - too much silence in the 
barn - too little liquor going, to be all safe. There's something 
up here tonight." He was under the lee of the barn and looked up 
where he had fixed the rockets ready to fire. This gave him a new 
idea.

   "I fixed them low so as to go over the sandhills and not 
be noticeable at Collieston or beyond. They are now placed up 
straight and will be seen for fifty miles if the weather be 
clear."

   It was too dark to see very clearly, and he would not climb 
up to examine them lest he should be noticed and his purpose of 
acquiring information frustrated; but then and there he made up 
his mind that Port Erroll or its neighbourhood had been the spot 
chosen for the running of the smuggled goods. He determined to 
find out more, and straightaway went round to the front and 
entered the room.


                       Chapter II

As soon as Sailor Willy was seen to enter, a large part of the 
gathering looked relieved, and at once began to chat and gabble in 
marked contrast to their previous gloom and silence. Port Erroll 
was well represented by its womankind, and by such of its men as 
were not away at the fishing; for it was the intention to mask the 
smuggling scheme by an assemblage at which all the respectability 
would be present. There appeared to be little rivalry between the 
two shoemakers, MacPherson and Beagrie, who chatted together in a 
corner, the former telling his companion how he had just been down
to the lifeboat-house to see, as one of the Committee, that it was 
all ready in case it should be wanted before the night was over. 
Lang John and Lang Jim, the policemen of the place, looked sprucer 
even than usual, and their buttons shone in the light of the many 
paraffin lamps as if they had been newly burnished. Mitchell and 
his companions of the salmon fishery were grouped in another corner, 
and Andrew Mason was telling Mackay, the new flesher, whose shed 
was erected on the edge of the burn opposite John Reid's shop, of 
a great crab which he had taken that morning in a pot opposite the
Twa Een.

   But these and nearly all the other Port Erroll folk present 
were quiet, and their talk was of local interest; the main clack 
of tongues came from the many strange men who stood in groups 
near the centre of the room and talked loudly. In the midst of 
them was the bridegroom, more joyous than any, though in the midst 
of his laughter he kept constantly turning to look at the door. 
The minister from Peterhead sat in a corner with the bride and 
her mother and father - the latter of whom, despite his constant 
laughter, had an anxious look on his face. Sailor Willy was 
greeted joyously, and the giver of the feast and the bridegroom 
each rose, and, taking a bottle and glass, offered him a drink.

   "To the bride", said he; but seeing that no one else was 
drinking, he tapped the bridegroom on the shoulder, "Come, drink 
this with me, my lad!" he added. The latter paused an instant 
and then helped himself from MacDonald's bottle. Willy did not 
fail to notice the act, and holding out his glass said:

   "Come, my lad, you drink with me! Change glasses in old style!" 
An odd pallor passed quickly across the bridegroom's face, but 
MacDonald spoke quickly:

   "Tak it, mon, tak it!" So he took the glass, crying "No 
heel-taps", threw back his head, and raised the glass. Willy 
threw back his head too, and tossed off his liquor, but, as he 
did so, took care to keep a sharp eye on the other, and saw 
him, instead of swallowing his liquor, pour it into his thick 
beard. His mind was quite made up now. They meant to keep him 
out of the way by fair means or foul.

   Just then two persons entered the room, one of them, James
Cruickshank of the Kilmarnock Arms, who was showing the way to 
the other, an elderly man with a bald head, keen eyes, a ragged 
grey beard, a hooked nose, and an evil smile. As he entered 
MacDonald jumped up and came over to greet him.

   "Oh! Mr Mendoza, this is braw! We hopit tae see ye the nicht, 
but we were that feared that ye wadna come."

   "Mein Gott, but why shall I not come - on this occasion of all - 
the occasion of the marriage of the daughter of mein goot frient, 
Tam Smack? And moreovers when I bring these as I haf promise. For 
you, mein frient Keith, this cheque, which one week you cash, and 
for you, my tear Miss Alice, these so bright necklace, which you 
will wear, ant which will sell if so you choose."

   As he spoke he handed his gifts to the groom and bride. He then 
walked to the corner where Mrs Mac sat, exchanging a keen look with 
his host as he did so. The latter seemed to have taken his cue and 
spoke out at once.

   "And now, reverend sir, we may proceed - all is ready." As 
he spoke the bridal pair stood up, and the friends crowded round. 
Sailor Willy moved towards the door, and just as the parson opened 
his book, began to pass out. Tammas Mac immediately spoke to him:

   "Ye're no gangin', Sailor Willy? Sure ye'll wait and see Tam
Keith marrit on my lass?"

   He instantly replied: "I must go for a while. I have some things 
to do, and then I want to try to bring Maggie down for the dance!" 
and before anything could be said, he was gone.

   The instant he left the door he slipped round to the back of 
the barn, and running across the sandhills to the left, crossed the 
wooden bridge, and hurrying up the roadway by the cottage on the 
cliff gained the watch-house. He knew that none of the company in 
the barn could leave till the service was over, with the minister's 
eye on them, without giving cause for after suspicion; and he knew, 
too, that as there were no windows on the south side of the barn, 
nothing could be seen from that side. Without a moment's delay 
he arranged his signals for the call for aid; and as the rockets 
whizzed aloft, sending a white glare far into the sky, he felt that 
the struggle had entered on its second stage.

   The night had now set in with a darkness unusual in August. The 
swaithes of sea-mist whirled in by the wind came fewer and fainter, 
and at times a sudden rift through the driving clouds showed that 
there was starlight somewhere between the driving masses of mist 
and gloom. Willy Barrow once more tried all his weapons and saw that 
all his signals were in order. Then he strapped the revolver and 
the cutlass in his belt, and lit a dark lantern so that it might be 
ready in case of need. This done, he left the watch-house, locking 
the door behind him, and, after looking steadily across the Bay to 
the Scaurs beyond, turned and walked northward towards the Watter's 
Mou'. Between the cliff on the edge of this and the watch-house 
there was a crane used for raising the granite boulders quarried 
below, and when he drew near this he stopped instinctively and 
called out, "Who is there?" for he felt, rather than saw, some 
presence. "It is only me, Willy," came a soft voice, and a woman 
drew a step nearer through the darkness from behind the shaft of 
the crane.

   "Maggie! Why, darling, what brings you here? I thought you were 
going to the wedding!"

   "I knew ye wadna be there, and I wanted to speak wi' ye" - this 
was said in a very low voice.

   "How did you know I wouldn't be there? - I was to join you if I 
could."

   "I saw Bella Cruickshank hand ye the telegram as ye went by the 
Post Office, and - and I knew there would be something to keep ye. 
O Willy, Willy! why do ye draw awa frae me?" for Sailor Willy had 
instinctively loosened his arms which were round her and had drawn 
back - in the instant his love and his business seemed as though 
antagonistic. He answered with blunt truthfulness:

   "I was thinking, Maggie, that I had no cause to be making love 
here and now. I've got work, mayhap, tonight!"

   "I feared so, Willy - I feared so!" Willy was touched, for it
seemed to him that she was anxious for him, and answered tenderly:

   "All right, dear! All right! There's no danger - why, if 
need be, I am armed," and he slipped his hand on the butt of the 
revolver in his belt. To his surprise Maggie uttered a deep low 
groan, and turning away sat on the turf bank beside her, as though 
her strength was failing her. Willy did not know what to say, so 
there was a space of silence. Then Maggie went on hurriedly:

   "Oh my God! it is a dreadfu' thing to lift yer han' in sic a 
deadly manner against yer neighbours, and ye not knowing what woe 
ye mau cause." Willy could answer this time:

   "Ah, lass! it's hard indeed, and that's the truth. But that's 
the very reason that men like me are put here that can and will do 
their duty no matter how hard it may be."

   Another pause, and then Maggie spoke again. Willy could not see 
her face, but she seemed to speak between gasps for breath.

   "Ye're lookin' for hard wark the nicht?"

   "I am! - I fear so."

   "I can guess that that telegram tellt ye that some boats would 
try to rin in somewhere the nicht."

   "Mayhap, lass. But the telegrams are secret, and I must not 
speak of what's in them."

   After a long pause Maggie spoke again, but in a voice so low 
that he could hardly hear her amid the roar of the breaking waves 
which came in on the wind:

   "Willy, ye're not a cruel man! - ye wadna, if ye could help it, 
dae harm to them that loved ye, or work woe to their belongin's?"

   "My lass! that I wouldn't." As he answered he felt a horrible
sinking of the heart. What did all this mean? Was it possible
that Maggie, too, had any interest in the smuggling? No, no! a 
thousand times no! Ashamed of his suspicion he drew closer and 
again put his arm around her in a protecting way. The unexpected 
tenderness overcame her, and, bursting into tears, she threw 
herself on Willy's neck and whispered to him between her sobs:

   "O Willy, Willy! I'm in sic sair trouble, and there's nane that 
I can speak to. Nae! not ane in the wide warld."

   "Tell me, darling; you know you'll soon be my wife, and then 
I'll have a right to know all!"

   "Oh, I canna! I canna! I canna!" she said, and taking her arms 
from around his neck she beat her hands wildly together. Willy was 
something frightened, for a woman's distress touches a strong man 
in direct ratio to his manliness. He tried to soothe her as though 
she were a frightened child, and held her tight to him.

   "There! there! my darling. Don't cry. I'm here with you, and 
you can tell me all your trouble." She shook her head; he felt the 
movement on his breast, and he went on:

   "Don't be frightened, Maggie; tell me all. Tell me quietly, 
and mayhap I can help ye out over the difficult places." Then he 
remained silent, and her sobs grew less violent; at last she 
raised her head and dashed away her tears fiercely with her hand. 
She dragged herself away from him: he tried to stop her, but she 
said:

   "Nae, nae, Willy dear; let me speak it in my ain way. If I 
canna trust ye, wha can I trust? My trouble is not for mysel." 
She paused, and he asked:

   "Who, then, is it for?"

   "My father and my brothers." Then she went on hurriedly, fearing 
to stop lest her courage should fail her, and he listened in dead 
silence, with a growing pain in his heart.

   "Ye ken that for several seasons back our boat has had bad 
luck - we took less fish and lost mair nets than any of the boats; 
even on the land everything went wrong. Our coo died, and the shed 
was blawn doon, and then the blight touched the potatoes in our 
field. Father could dae naething, and had to borrow money on the 
boat to go on with his wark; and the debt grew and grew, till now 
he only owns her in name, and we never ken when we may be sold up. 
And the man that has the mortgage isn't like to let us off or gie 
time!"

   "Who is he? His name?" said Willy hoarsely.

   "Mendoza - the man frae Hamburg wha lends to the boats at 
Peterhead."

   Willy groaned. Before his eyes rose the vision of that hard, 
cruel, white face that he had seen only a few minutes ago, and 
again he saw him hand over the presents with which he had bought 
the man and woman to help in his wicked scheme. When Maggie 
heard the groan her courage and her hope arose. If her lover 
could take the matter so much to heart all might yet be well, and 
in the moment all the womanhood in her awoke to the call. Her 
fear had broken down the barriers that had kept back her passion, 
and now the passion came with all the force of a virgin nature. 
She drew Willy close to her - closer still - and whispered to 
him in a low sweet voice, that thrilled with emotion:

   "Willy, Willy, darlin'; ye wouldna see harm come to my father - 
my father, my father!" and in a wave of tumultuous, voluptuous 
passion she kissed him full in the mouth. Willy felt for the moment 
half dazed. Love has its opiates that soothe and stun even in the 
midst of their activity. He clasped Maggie close in his arms, and 
for a moment their hearts beat together and their mouths breathed 
the same air. Then Willy drew back, but Maggie hung limp in his 
arms. The silence which hung in the midst of nature's tumult broke 
its own spell. Willy realised what and where he was: with the waves 
dashing below his feet and the night wind laden with drifting mist 
wreathing around him in the darkness, and whistling amongst the 
rocks and screaming sadly through the ropes and stays of the 
flagstaff on the cliff. There was a wild fear in his heart and a 
burning desire to know all that was in his sweetheart's mind.

   "Go on, Maggie! go on!" he said. Maggie roused herself and again 
took up the thread of her story - this time in feverish haste. The 
moment of passion had disquieted and disturbed her. She seemed to 
herself to be two people, one of whom was new to her, and whom she 
feared, but woman-like, she felt that as she had begun so much she 
go on; and thus her woman's courage sustained her.

   "Some weeks ago, father began to get letters frae Mr Mendoza, 
and they aye upset him. He wrote answers and sent them away at 
once. Then Mr Mendoza sent him a telegram frae Hamburg, and he 
sent a reply - and a month ago father got a telegram telling him 
to meet him at Peterhead. He was very angry at first and very 
low-spirited after; but he went to Peterhead, and when he cam 
back he was very still and quite pale. He would eat naething, and 
went to bed although it was only seven o'clock. Then there were 
more letters and telegrams, but father answered nane o' them - sae 
far as I ken - and then Mr Mendoza cam to our hoose. Father got 
as pale as a sheet when he saw him, and then he got red and angry, 
and I thocht he was going to strike him; but Mr Mendoza said not 
to frichten his daughter, and father got quiet and sent me oot on 
a message to the Nether Mill. And when I cam back Mr Mendoza had 
gone, and father was sitting with his face in his hands, and he 
didna hear me come in. When I spoke, he started up and he was as 
white as a sheet, and then he mumbled something and went into his 
room. And ever since then he hardly spoke to any one, and seemed 
to avoid me a'thegither. When he went away the last time he never 
even kissed me. And so, Willy - so, I fear that that awfu' Mr
Mendoza has made him dae something that he didna want to dae, 
and it's all breaking my heart!" and again she laid her head on 
her lover's breast and sobbed. Willy breathed more freely; but 
he could not be content to remain in doubt, and his courage was 
never harder tried than when he asked his next question.

   "Then, Maggie, you don't know anything for certain?"

   "Naething, Willy - but I fear."

   "But there may be nothing, after all!" Maggie's hopes rose 
again, for there was something in her lover's voice which told 
her that he was willing to cling to any straw, and once again her 
woman's nature took advantage of her sense of right and wrong. 
"Please God, Willy, there may be naething! but I fear much that 
it may be so; but we must act as if we didna fear. It wadna dae to 
suspect poor father without some cause. You know, Willy, the Earl 
has promised to mak him the new harbourmaster. Old Forgie is 
bedridden now, and when winter comes he'll no even be able to 
pretend to work, so the Earl is to pension him, and father will 
get the post and hae the hoose by the harbour, and you know that 
every one's sae glad, for they a'respect father."

   "Ay, lass," interrupted Willy, "that's true; and why, then, 
should we - you and me, Maggie - think he would do ill to please 
that damned scoundrel, Mendoza?"

   "Indeed, I'm thinkin' that it's just because that he is 
respeckit that Mendoza wants him to help him. He kens weel that 
nane would suspeck father, and - ' here she clipped her lover 
close in her arms once again, and her breath came hot in his face 
till it made him half drunk with a voluptuous intoxication - "he 
kens that father, my father, would never be harmt by my lover!"

   Even then, at the moment when the tragedy of his life seemed 
to be accomplished, when the woman he loved and honoured seemed to 
be urging him to some breach of duty, Willy Barrow could not but 
feel that some responsibility for her action rested on him. That 
first passionate kiss, which had seemed to unlock the very gates 
of her soul - in which she had yielded herself to him - had some 
mysterious bond or virtue like that which abides in the wedding 
ring. The Maggie who thus acted was his Maggie, and in all that 
came of it he had a part. But his mind was made up; nothing - not 
Maggie's kisses or Maggie's fears - would turn him from his path 
of duty, and strong in this resolution he could afford to be silent 
to the woman in his arms. Maggie instinctively knew that silence 
could now be her best weapon, and said no word as they walked 
towards the guard-house, Willy casting keen looks seawards, and 
up and down the coast as they went. When they were so close that 
in its shelter the roar of the surf seemed muffled, Maggie again 
nestled close to her lover, and whispered in his ear as he looked 
out over Cruden Bay:

   "The Sea Gull comes hame the nicht!" Willy quivered, but said 
nothing for a time that seemed to be endless. Then he answered - 
"They'll find it hard to make the Port tonight. Look! the waves 
are rolling high and the wind is getting up. It would be madness 
to try it." Again she whispered to him:

   "Couldna she rin in somewhere else - there are other openings 
besides Port Erroll in Buchan!" Willy laughed the laugh of a 
strong man who knew well what he said:

   "Other openings! Ay, lass, there are other openings; but the 
coble isn't built that can run them this night. With a south-east 
gale, who would dare to try? The Bullers, or Robies Haven, or 
Dunbuy, or Twa Havens, or Lang Haven, or The Watter's Mou' - why, 
lass, they'd be in matches on the rocks before they could turn 
their tiller or slack a sail."

   She interrupted him, speaking with a despairing voice:

   "Then ye'll no hae to watch nane o' them the nicht?"

   "Nay, Maggie. Port Erroll is my watch tonight; and from it I 
won't budge."

   "And the Watter's Mou'?" she asked, "it that no safe 
wi'oot watch? it's no far frae the Port." Again Willy laughed 
his arrogant, masculine laugh, which made Maggie, despite her 
trouble, admire him more than ever, and he answered:

   "The Watter's Mou'? To try to get in there in this wind would 
be to court sudden death. Why, lass, it would take a man all he 
knew to get out from there, let alone get in, in this weather! 
And then the chances would be ten to one that he'd be dashed to 
pieces on the rocks beyond," and he pointed to where a line of 
sharp rocks rose between the billows on the south side of the 
inlet. Truly it was a fearful-looking place to be dashed on, for 
the great waves broke on the rocks with a loud roaring, and even 
in the semi-darkness they could see the white lines as the waters 
poured down to leeward in the wake of the heaving wave. The white 
cluster of rocks looked like a ghostly mouth opened to swallow 
whatever might come in touch. Maggie shuddered; but some sudden 
idea seemed to strike her, and she drew away from her lover for a 
moment, and looked towards the black cleft in the rocks of which 
they could just see the top from where they stood - the entrance 
to the Watter's Mou'.

   And then with one long, wild, appealing glance skyward, as 
though looking a prayer which she dared not utter even in her 
heart, Maggie turned towards her lover once more. Again she drew 
close to him, and hung around his neck, and said with many gasps 
and pauses between her words:

   "If the Sea Gull should come in to the Port the nicht, and if 
ony attempt that ye feared should tak you away to Whinnyfold  or 
to Dunbuy so that you might be a bit - only a wee bit - late to 
search when the boat cam in - "

   She stopped affrighted, for Willy put her from him to arm's 
length, not too gently either, and said to her so sternly that 
each word seemed to smite her like the lash of a whip, till she 
shrunk and quivered and cowered away from him:

   "Maggie, lass! What's this you're saying to me? It isn't fit 
for you to speak or me to hear! It's bad enough to be a smuggler, 
but what is it that you would make of me? Not only a smuggler, 
but a perjurer and a traitor too. God! am I mistaken? Is it you, 
Maggie, that would make this of me? Of me! Maggie MacWhirter, if 
this be your counsel, then God help us both! you are no fit wife 
for me!" In an instant the whole truth dawned on Maggie of what 
a thing she would make of the man she loved, whom she had loved 
at the first because he was strong and brave and true. In the 
sudden revulsion of her feelings she flung herself on her knees 
beside him, and took his hand and held it hard, and despite his 
efforts to withdraw it, kissed it wildly in the humility of her 
self-abasement, and poured out to him a passionate outburst of 
pleading for his forgiveness, of justification of herself, and 
of appeals to his mercy for her father.

   "Oh Willy, Willy! dinna turn frae me this nicht! My heart is 
sae fu' o' trouble that I am nigh mad! I dinna ken what to dae 
nor where to look for help! I think, and think, and think, and 
everywhere there is nought but dark before me, just as there is 
blackness oot ower the sea, when I look for my father. And noo 
when I want ye to help me - ye that are all I hae, and the only 
ane on earth that I can look tae in my wae and trouble - I can 
dae nae mair than turn ye frae me! Ye that I love! oh, love more 
than my life or my soul! I must dishonour and mak ye hate me! Oh, 
what shall I dae? What shall I dae? What shall I dae?" and again 
she beat the palms of her hands together in a paroxysm of wild 
despair, whilst Willy looked on with his heart full of pain and 
pity, though his resolution never flinched. And then through the 
completeness of her self-abasement came the pleading of her soul 
from a depth of her nature even deeper than despair. Despair 
has its own bravery, but hope can sap the strongest resolution. 
And the pleadings of love came from the depths of that Pandora's 
box which we call human nature.

   "O Willy, Willy! forgie me - forgie me! I was daft to say 
what I did! I was daft to think that ye would be so base! - daft 
to think that I would like you to so betray yoursel! Forgie me, 
Willy, forgie me, and tak my wild words as spoken not to ye but 
to the storm that maks me fear sae for my father! Let me tak it a' 
back, Willy darlin' - Willy, my Willy; and dinna leave me desolate 
here with this new shadow ower me!" Here, as she kissed his hand 
again, her lover stooped and raised her in his strong arms and 
held her to him. And then, when she felt herself in a position 
of security, the same hysterical emotion came sweeping up in her 
brain and her blood - the same self-abandonment to her lover 
overcame her - and the current of her thought once again turned 
to win from him something by the force of her woman's wile and 
her woman's contact with the man.

   "Willy," she whispered, as she kissed him on the mouth and 
then kissed his head on the side of his neck, "Willy, ye have 
forgien me, I ken - and I ken that ye'll harm father nae mair 
than ye can help - but if - "

   What more she was going to say she hardly knew herself. As 
for Willy, he felt that something better left unsaid was coming, 
and unconsciously his muscles stiffened till he held her from 
him rather than to him. She, too, felt the change, and held him 
closer - closer still, with the tenacity induced by a sense of 
coming danger. Their difficulty was solved for them, for just 
on the instant when the suggestion of treachery to his duty was 
hanging on her lips, there came from the village below, in a 
pause between the gusts of wind, the fierce roar of a flying 
rocket. Up and up and up, as though it would never stop - up it 
rose with its prolonged screech, increasing in sound at the first 
till it began to die away in the aerial heights above, so that 
when the explosion came it seemed to startle a quietude around 
it. Up in the air a thousand feet over their heads the fierce 
glitter of the falling fires of red and blue made a blaze of 
light which lit up the coast-line from the Scaurs to Dunbuy, and 
with an instinctive intelligence Willy Barrow took in all he 
saw, including the many men at the little port below, sheltering 
under the sea-wall from the sweeping of the waves as they looked 
out seawards. Instinctively also he counted the seconds till the 
next rocket should be fired - one, two, three; and then another 
roar and another blaze of coloured lights. And then another pause, 
of six seconds this time! and then the third rocket sped aloft 
with its fiery message. And then the darkness seemed blacker than 
ever, and the mysterious booming of the sea to grow louder and 
louder as though it came through silence. By this time the man 
and the woman were apart no less in spirit than physically. Willy, 
intent on his work, was standing outside the window of the 
guard-house, whence he could see all around the Bay and up and 
down the coast, and at the same time command the whole of the 
harbour. His feet were planted wide apart, for on the exposed 
rock the sweep of the wind was strong, and as he raised his arm 
with his field-glass to search the horizon the wind drove back 
his jacket and showed the butt of his revolver and the hilt of 
his cutlass. Maggie stood a little behind him, gazing seawards, 
with no less eager eyes, for she too expected what would follow. 
Her heart seemed to stand still though her breath came in quick 
gasps, and she did not dare to make a sound or to encroach on 
the business-like earnestness of the man. For full a minute they 
waited thus, and then far off at sea, away to the south, they 
saw a faint blue light, and then another and another, till at 
the last three lights were burning in a row. Instantly from the 
town a single rocket went up - not this time a great Board of 
Trade rocket, laden with coloured fire, but one which left a 
plain white track of light behind it. Willy gazed seawards, but 
there was no more sign from the far-off ship at sea; the signal, 
whatever it was, was complete. The coastguard was uncertain as 
to the meaning, but to Maggie no explanation was necessary. There, 
away at sea, tossed on the stormy waters, was her father. There 
was danger round him, but a greater danger on the shore - every 
way of entrance was barred by the storm - save the one where, 
through his fatal cargo, dishonour lay in wait for him. She seemed 
to see her duty clear before her, and come what might she meant 
to do it: her father must be warned. It was with a faint voice 
indeed that she now spoke to her lover:

   "Willy!"

   His heart was melted at the faltering voice, but he feared she 
was trying some new temptation, so, coldly and hardly enough, he 
answered:

   "What is it, lass?"

   "Willy, ye wadna see poor father injured?"

   "No, Maggie, not if I could help it. But I'd have to do my 
duty all the same."

   "And we should a' dae oor duty - whatever it might be - at 
a' costs?"

   "Ay, lass - at all costs!" His voice was firm enough now, 
and there was no mistaking the truth of its ring. Maggie's hope 
died away. From the stern task which seemed to rise before her 
over the waste of the black sea she must not shrink. There was 
but one more yielding to the weakness of her fear, and she said, 
so timidly that Willy was startled, the voice and manner were so 
different from those he had ever known:

   "And if - mind I say  'if', Willy - I had a duty to dae and 
it was fu' o' fear and danger, and ye could save me frae it, 
wad ye?" As she waited for his reply, her heart beat so fast and 
so heavily that Willy could hear it: her very life, she felt, 
lay in his answer. He did not quite understand the full import 
of her words and all that they implied, but he knew that she 
was in deadly earnest, and he felt that some vague terror lay 
in his answer; but the manhood in him rose to the occasion - 
Willy Barrow was of the stuff of which heroes are made - and he 
replied:

   "Maggie, as God is above us, I have no other answer to give! 
I don't know what you mean, but I have a shadow of fear! I must do 
my duty whatever comes of it!" There was a long pause, and then 
Maggie spoke again, but this time in so different a voice that her 
lover's heart went out to her in tenfold love and passion, with 
never a shadow of doubt or fear.

   "Willy, tak me in your arms - I am not unworthy, dear, though 
for a moment I did falter!" He clasped her to him, and whispered 
when their lips had met:

   "Maggie, my darling, I never loved you like now. I would die 
for you if I could do you good."

   "Hush, dear, I ken it weel. But your duty is not only for 
yoursel, and it must be done! I too hae a duty to dae - a grave 
and stern ane!"

   "What is it? Tell me, Maggie dear!"

   "Ye maunna ask me! Ye maun never ken! Kiss me once again, 
Willy, before I go - for oh, my love, my love! it may be the 
last!"

   Her words were lost in the passionate embrace which followed. 
Then, when he least expected it, she suddenly tore herself away 
and fled through the darkness across the field which lay between 
them and her home, whilst he stood doggedly at his watch looking 
out for another signal between sea and shore.


                         Chapter III
                                                                                                     
When she got to the far side of the field, Maggie, instead of 
turning to the left, which would have brought her home, went down 
the sloping track to the right, which led to the rustic bridge 
crossing the Back Burn near the Pigeon Tower. Thence turning to the 
right she scrambled down the bank beside the ruined barley-mill, 
so as to reach the little plots of sea-grass - islands, except at 
low tide - between which the tide rises to meet the waters of the 
stream.

   The whole situation of Cruden is peculiar. The main stream, 
the Water of Cruden, runs in a south-easterly direction, skirts 
the sandhills, and, swirling under the stone bridge, partly 
built with the ruins of the old church which Malcolm erected to 
celebrate his victory over Sueno, turns suddenly to the right 
and runs to sea over a stony bottom. The estuary has in its wash 
some dangerous outcropping granite rocks, nearly covered at high 
tide, and the mouth opens between the most northerly end of the 
sandhills and the village street, whose houses mark the slope 
of the detritus from the rocks. Formerly the Water of Cruden, 
instead of taking this last turn, used to flow straight on till 
it joined the lesser stream known as the Back Burn, and together 
the streams ran seawards. Even in comparatively recent years, 
in times of flood or freshet, the spate broke down or swept over 
the intervening tongue of land, and the Water of Cruden took 
its old course seaward. This course is what is known as the 
Watter's Mou'. It is a natural cleft - formed by primeval fire 
or earthquake or some sort of natural convulsion - which runs 
through the vast mass of red granite which forms a promontory 
running due south. Water has done its work as well as fire in 
the formation of the gully as it now is, for the drip and flow 
and rush of water that mark the seasons for countless ages have
completed the work of the pristine fire. As one sees this natural 
mouth of the stream in the rocky face of the cliff, it is hard 
to realise that Nature alone has done the work.

   At first the cleft runs from west to east, and broadens out 
into a wide bay of which on one side a steep grassy slope leads 
towards the new castle of Slains, and on the other rises a sheer 
bank, with tufts of the thick grass growing on the ledges, where 
the earth has been blown. From this the cleft opens again between 
towering rocks like what in America is called a canon and tends 
seaward to the south between precipices two hundred feet high, 
and over a bottom of great boulders exposed at low water towards 
the northern end. The precipice to the left or eastward side is 
twice rent with great openings, through which, in time of storm, 
the spray and spume of the easterly gale piling the great waves 
into the Castle Bay are swept. These openings are, however, so 
guarded with masses of rock that the force of the wildest wave 
is broken before it can leap up the piles of boulders which rise 
from their sandy floors. At the very mouth the cleft opens away 
to the west, where the cliff falls back, and seaward of which 
rise great masses of black frowning rock, most of which only show 
their presence at high water by the angry patches of foam which
even in calm weather mark them - for the current here runs fast. 
The eastern portal is composed of a giant mass of red granite, 
which, from its overhanging shape, is known as "the Ship's 
Starn". It lies somewhat lower than the cliff of which it is a 
part, being attached to it by a great sloping shelf of granite, 
over which, when the storm is easterly, the torrent of spray 
sent up by the dashing waves rolls down to join the foamy waves 
in the Watter's Mou'.

   Maggie knew that close to the Barley Mill, safe from the onset 
of the waves - for the wildest waves that ever rise lose their
force fretting and churning on the stony sides and bottom of the 
Watter's Mou' - was kept a light boat belonging to her brother, 
which he sometimes used when the weather was fine and he wanted to 
utilise his spare time in line fishing. Her mind was made up that 
it was her duty to give her father warning of what awaited him 
on landing - if she could. She was afraid to think of the danger, 
of the myriad chances against her success; but, woman-like, when 
once the idea was fixed in her mind she went straight on to 
its realisation. Truly, thought of any kind would have been an
absolute barrier to action in such a case, for any one of the 
difficulties ahead would have seemed sufficient. To leave the 
shore at all on such a night, and in such a frail craft, with 
none but a girl to manage it; then to find a way, despite storm 
and current, out to the boat so far off at sea; and finally, to 
find the boat she wanted at all in the fret of such a stormy 
sea - a wilderness of driving mist - in such a night, when never 
a star even was to be seen: the prospect might well appal the
bravest.

   But to think was to hesitate, and to hesitate was to fail. 
Keeping her thoughts on the danger to her father, and seeing 
through the blackness of the stormy night his white, woe-laden 
face before her, and hearing through the tumult of the tempest 
his sobs as on that night when her fear for him began to be 
acute, she set about her work with desperate energy. The boat 
was moored on the northern side of the largest of the little 
islands of sea-grass, and so far in shelter that she could get 
all in readiness. She set the oars in their places, stepped 
the mast, and rigged the sail ready to haul up. Then she took 
a small spar of broken wood and knotted to it a piece of rope, 
fastening the other end of the rope, some five yards long, just
under the thwarts near the centre of the boat, and just a little
forward on the port side. The spar she put carefully ready to 
throw out of the boat when the sweep of the wind should take 
her sail - for without some such strain as it would afford, the 
boat would probably heel over. Then she guided the boat in the 
shallow water round the little island till it was stern on to 
the sea side. It was rough work, for the rush and recoil of the 
waves beat the boat back on the sandy bank or left her now and 
again dry till a new wave lifted her.

   All this time she took something of inspiration from the 
darkness and the roar of the storm around her. She was not 
yet face to face with danger, and did not realise, or try to 
realise, its magnitude. In such a mystery of darkness as lay 
before, above, and around her, her own personality seemed as 
nought. Truly there is an instinct of one's own littleness 
which becomes consciously manifest in the times when Nature 
puts forth her might. The wind swept up the channel of the 
Watter's Mou' in great gusts, till the open bay where she
stood became the centre of an intermittent whirlwind. The 
storm came not only from the Mouth itself, but through the 
great gaps in the eastern wall. It drove across the gully 
till high amongst the rocks overhead on both sides it seemed 
now and again to scream as a living thing in pain or anger. 
Great sheets of mist appeared out of the inky darkness beyond, 
coming suddenly as though like the great sails of ships 
driving up before the wind. With gladness Maggie saw that 
the sheets of fog were becoming fewer and thinner, and 
realised that so far her dreadful task was becoming possible. 
She was getting more inspired by the sound and elemental 
fury around her. There was in her blood, as in the blood of 
all the hardy children of the northern seas, some strain 
of those study Berserkers who knew no fear, and rode the 
very tempest on its wings with supreme bravery. Such natures 
rise with the occasion, and now, when the call had come, 
Maggie's brave nature answered it. It was with a strong, 
almost an eager, heart that she jumped into the boat, and 
seizing the oars, set out on her perilous course. The start 
was difficult, for the boat was bumping savagely on the 
sand; but, taking advantage of a big wave, two or three 
powerful strokes took her out into deeper water. Here, too, 
there was shelter, for the cliffs rose steeply; and when 
she had entered the elbow of the gully and saw before her 
the whole length of the Watter's Mou', the drift of the 
wind took it over her head, and she was able to row in 
comparative calmness under the shadow of the cliffs. A 
few minutes took her to the first of the openings in the 
eastern cliff, and here she began to feel the full fury 
of the storm. The opening itself was sheer on each side, 
but in the gap between was piled a mass of giant boulders, 
the work of the sea at its wildest during the centuries of 
stress. On the farther side of these the waves broke, and 
sent up a white cloud of spume that drove instantly into 
the darkness beyond. Maggie knew that here her first great 
effort had to be made, and lending her strength pulled the 
boat through the turmoil of wind and wave. As she passed 
the cleft, driven somewhat more out into the middle of the 
channel, she caught, in a pause between the rush of the 
waves, a glimpse of the lighted windows of the castle on 
the cliff. The sight for an instant unnerved her, for it 
brought into opposition her own dreadful situation, mental 
and physical, with the happy faces of those clustered round 
the comforting light. But the reaction was helpful, for 
the little jealousy which was at the base of the idea was 
blotted out by the thought of that stem and paramount duty 
which she had undertaken. Not seldom in days gone by had 
women like her, in times of test and torment, taken their 
way over the red-hot ploughshares under somewhat similar 
stress of mind.

   She was now under the shelter of the cliff, and gaining the 
second and last opening in the rocky wall: as the boat advanced 
the force of the waves became greater, for every yard up the 
Watter's Mou' the fretting of the rocky bottom and sides had 
broken their force. This was brought home to her roughly when 
the breaking of a coming wave threw a sheet of water over her as 
she bent to her oars. Chop! chop! went the boat into the trough 
of each succeeding wave, till it became necessary to bale out the 
boat or she might never even get started on her way. This done 
she rowed on, and now came to the second opening in the cliff. 
This was much wilder than the first, for outside of it, to the 
east, the waves of the North Sea broke in all their violence, and
with the breaking of each a great sheet of water came drifting 
over the wall of piled up boulders. Again Maggie kept out in the 
channel, and, pulling with all her might, passed again into the 
shelter of the cliff. Here the water was stiller, for the waves 
were breaking directly behind the sheltering cliff, and the 
sound of them was heard high overhead in the rushing wind.

   Maggie drew close to the rock, and, hugging it, crept on 
her outward way. There was now only one danger to come, before 
her final effort. The great shelf of rock inside the Ship's 
Starn was only saved from exposure by its rise on the outer side; 
but here, happily, the waves did not break, they swept under the 
overhanging slope on the outer side, and then passed on their 
way; the vast depth of the water outside was their protection 
within. Now and then a wave broke on the edge of the Ship's 
Starn, and then a great wall of green water rose and rushed down 
the steep slope, but in the pause between Maggie passed along; 
and now the boat nestled on the black water, under the shelter 
of the very outermost wall of rock. The Ship's Starn was now 
her last refuge. As she hurriedly began to get the sail ready 
she could hear the whistling of the wind round the outer side 
of the rock and overhead. The black water underneath her rose 
and fell, but in some mysterious eddy or backwater of Nature's 
forces she rested in comparative calm on the very edge of the 
maelstrom. By contrast with the darkness of the Watter's Mou' 
between the towering walls of rock, the sea had some mysterious 
light of its own, and just outside the opening on the western 
side she could see the white water pouring over the sunken rocks 
as the passing waves exposed them, till once more they looked 
like teeth in the jaws of the hungry sea.

   And now came the final struggle in her effort to get out to 
open water. The moment she should pass beyond the shelter of the 
Ship's Starn the easterly gale would in all probability drive 
her straight upon the outer reef of rocks amongst those angry 
jaws, where the white teeth would in an instant grind her and her 
boat to nothingness. But if she should pass this last danger she 
should be out in the open sea and might make her way to save her 
father. She held in her mind the spot whence she had seen the 
answering signal to the rockets, and felt a blind trust that 
God would help her in her difficulty. Was not God pleased with 
self-sacrifice? What could be better for a maid than to save her 
father from accomplished sin and the discovery which made sin so 
bitter to bear? "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man 
lay down his life for his friend." Besides there was Sailor 
Willy! Had not he - even he - doubted her; and might she not 
by this wild night's work win back her old place in his heart 
and his faith? Strong in this new hope, she made careful 
preparation for her great effort. She threw overboard the spar 
and got ready the tiller. Then having put the sheet round the 
thwart on the starboard side, and laid the loose end where she 
could grasp it whilst holding the tiller, she hoisted the sail 
and belayed the rope that held it. In the eddy of the storm 
behind the sheltered rock the sail hung idly for a few seconds, 
and in this time she jumped to the stern and held the tiller 
with one hand and with the other drew the sheet of the sail taut 
and belayed it. An instant after, the sail caught a gust of 
wind and the boat sprang, as though a living thing, out toward 
the channel. The instant the shelter was past the sail caught 
the full sweep of the easterly gale, and the boat would have 
turned over only for the strain from the floating spar line, 
which now did its part well. The bow was thrown round towards
the wind, and the boat began rushing through the water at a 
terrific pace. Maggie felt the coldness of death in her heart; 
but in that wild moment the bravery of her nature came out. 
She shut her teeth and jammed the tiller down hard, keeping it 
in place against her thigh, with the other leg pressed like a 
pillar against the side of the boat. The little craft seemed 
sweeping right down on the outer rocks; already she could see 
the white wall of water, articulated into white lines like 
giant hairs, rushing after the retreating waves, and a great 
despair swept over her. But at that moment the rocks on the 
western side of the Watter's Mou' opened so far that she caught 
a glimpse of Sailor Willy's lamp reflected through the window 
of the coastguard hut. This gave her new hope, and with a 
mighty effort she pressed the tiller harder. The boat sank 
in the trough of the waves, rose again, the spar caught the 
rush of the receding wave and pulled the boat's head a point 
round, and then the outer rock was passed, and the boat, 
actually touching the rock so that the limpets scraped her 
side, ran free in the stormy waves beyond.

   Maggie breathed a prayer as with trembling hand she unloosed 
the rope of the floating spar; then, having loosened the sheet, 
she turned the boat's head south, and, tacking, ran out in the 
direction where she had seen the signal light of her father's 
boat.

   By contrast with the terrible turmoil amid the rocks, the
great waves of the open sea were safety itself. No one to whom
the sea is an occupation ever fears it in the open; and this
fisher's daughter, with the Viking blood in her veins, actually
rejoiced as the cockleshell of a boat, dipping and jerking like
an angry horse, drove up and down the swell of the waves. She 
was a good way out now, and the whole coast-line east and west 
was opening up to her. The mist had gone by, or, if it lasted, 
hung amid the rocks inshore; and through the great blackness 
round she saw the lights in the windows of the castle, the 
glimmering lights of the village of Cruden, and far off the 
powerful light at Girdleness blazing out at intervals. But 
there was one light on which her eyes lingered fixedly - the 
dim window of the coastguard's shelter, where she knew that 
her lover kept his grim watch. Her heart was filled with 
gladness as she thought that by what she was doing she would
keep pain and trouble from him. She knew now, what she had
all along in her heart believed, that Sailor Willy would not
flinch from any duty however stern and pain-laden to him it 
might be; and she knew, too, that neither her rugged father 
nor her passionate young brother would ever forgive him for 
that duty. But now she would not, could not, think of failing, 
but gripped the tiller hard, and with set teeth and fixed 
eyes held on her perilous way.

   Time went by hour by hour, but so great was her anxiety that 
she never noted how it went, but held on her course, tacking 
again and again as she tried to beat her way to her father 
through the storm. The eyes of sea folk are not ordinary eyes -
they can pierce the darkness wherein the vision of land folk 
becomes lost or arrested; and the sea and the sky over it, and 
the coastline, however black and dim - however low-lying or 
distant - have lessons of their own. Maggie began by some 
mysterious instinct to find her way where she wanted to go, 
till little by little the coast-line, save for the distant 
lights of Girdleness and Boddam, faded out of sight. Lying as 
she was on the very surface of the water, she had the horizon 
rising as it were around her, and there is nearly always some 
slight sign of light somewhere on the horizon's rim. There 
came now and again rents in the thick clouding of the stormy 
sky, and at such moments here and there came patches of lesser 
darkness like oases of light in the desert of the ebon sea. At 
one such moment she saw far off to the port side the outline 
of a vessel well known on the coast, the revenue cutter which 
was the seaward arm of the preventive service. And then a 
great fear came over poor Maggie's heart; the sea was no 
longer the open sea, for her father was held in the toils of 
his enemies, and escape seaward became difficult or would be 
almost impossible, when the coming morn would reveal all the 
mysteries that the darkness hid. Despair, however, has its own 
courage, and Maggie was too far in her venture now to dread 
for more than a passing moment anything which might follow. 
She knew that the Sea Gull lay still to the front, and with a 
beating heart and a brain that throbbed with the eagerness of 
hope and fear she held on her course. The break in the sky which 
had shown her the revenue cutter was only momentary, and all was 
again swallowed up in the darkness; but she feared that some 
other such rent in the cloudy night might expose her father to 
his enemies. Every moment, therefore, became precious, and 
steeling her heart and drawing the sheet of her sail as tight 
as she dared, she sped on into the darkness - on for a time 
that seemed interminable agony. Suddenly something black loomed 
up ahead of her, thrown out against the light of the horizon's 
rim, and her heart gave a great jump, for something told her 
that the Powers which aid the good wishes of daughters had 
sent her father out of that wilderness of stormy sea. With 
her sea-trained eyes she knew in a few moments that the boat 
pitching so heavily was indeed the Sea Gull. At the same 
moment some one on the boat's deck saw her sail, and a hoarse 
muffled murmur of voices came to her over the waves in the 
gale. The coble's head was thrown round to the wind, and in 
that stress of storm and chopping sea she beat and buffeted, 
and like magic her way stopped, and she lay tossing. Maggie 
realised the intention of the manoeuvre, and deftly swung her 
boat round till she came under the starboard quarter of the 
fishing-boat, and in the shadow of her greater bulk and vaster 
sail, reefed though it was, found a comparative calm. Then 
she called out:

   "Father! It's me - Maggie! Dinna show a licht, but try to
throw me a rope."

   With a shout in which were mingled many strong feelings, 
her father leaned over the bulwark, and, with seaman's instinct 
of instant action, threw her a rope. She deftly caught it, and, 
making it fast to the bows of her boat, dropped her sail. Then 
someone threw her another rope, which she fastened round her 
waist. She threw herself into the sea, and, holding tight to 
the rope, was shortly pulled breathless on board the Sea Gull.

   She was instantly the centre of a ring of men. Not only
were her father and two brothers on board, but there were
no less than six men, seemingly foreigners, in the group.

   "Maggie!" said her father, "in God's name, lass, hoo cam ye 
oot here? Were ye ovrta'en by the storm? God be thankit that ye 
met us, for this is a wild nicht to be oot on the North Sea by 
yer lanes."

   "Father!" said she, in a hurried whisper in his ear. "I must
speak wi' ye alane. There isna a moment to lose!"

   "Speak on, lass."

   "No' before these strangers, father. I must speak alane!"
Without a word, MacWhirter took his daughter aside, and, amid a 
muttered dissatisfaction of the strange men, signed to her to 
proceed. Then, as briefly as she could, Maggie told her father 
that it was known that a cargo was to be run that night, that 
the coastguard all along Buchan had been warned, and that she 
had come out to tell him of his danger.

   As she spoke the old man groaned, and after a pause said: "I 
maun tell the rest. I'm no' the maister here the noo. Mendoza has 
me in his grip, an' his men rule here!"

   "But, father, the boat is yours, and the risk is yours. It is
you'll be punished if there is a discovery!"

   "That may be, lass, but I'm no' free."

   "I feared it was true, father, but I thocht it my duty to
come!" Doubtless the old man knew that Maggie would understand 
fully what he meant, but the only recognition he made of her 
act of heroism was to lay his hand heavily on her shoulder. Then 
stepping forward he called the men round him, and in his own 
rough way told them of the danger. The strangers muttered and 
scowled; but Andrew and Neil drew close to their sister, and 
the younger man put his arm around her and pressed her to him. 
Maggie felt the comfort of the kindness, and laying her head on 
her brother's shoulder, cried quietly in the darkness. It was a 
relief to her pent-up feelings to be able to give way if only 
so far. When MacWhirter brought his tale to a close, and asked: 
"And now, lads, what's to be done?" one of the strangers, a 
brawny, heavily-built man, spoke out harshly:

   "But for why this? Was it not that this woman's lover was
of the guard? In this affair the women must do their best too. 
This lover of the guard - " He was hotly interrupted by Neil:

   "Tisna the part of Maggie to tak a hand in this at a'."

   "But I say it is the part of all. When Mendoza bought this
man he bought all - unless there be traitors in his housed!"
This roused Maggie, who spoke out quickly, for she feared her 
brother's passion might brew trouble:

   "I hae nae part in this dreadfu' affair. It's no' by ma wish
or ma aid that father has embarked in this - this enterprise. I 
hae naught to dae wi't o' ony kind."

   "Then for why are you here?" asked the burly man, with a
coarse laugh.

   "Because ma father and ma brithers are in danger, danger into 
which they hae been led, or been forced, by ye and the like o' ye. 
Do you think it was for pleasure, or, O my God! for profit either, 
that I cam oot this nicht - an' in that?" and as she spoke she 
pointed to where the little boat strained madly at the rope which 
held her. Then MacWhirter spoke out fiercely, so fiercely that 
the lesser spirits who opposed him were cowed:

   "Leave the lass alane, I say! Yon's nane o' her doin'; and if 
ye be men ye'd honour her that cam oot in sic a tempest for the 
sake o' the likes o' me - o' us!"

   But when the strangers were silent, Neil, whose passion had been 
aroused, could not be quietened, and spoke out with a growing fury 
which seemed to choke him:

   "So Sailor Willy told ye the danger and then let ye come oot in 
this nicht! He'll hae to reckon wi' me for that when we get in."

   "He telt me naething. I saw Bella Cruickshank gie him the
telegram, and I guessed. He doesna ken I'm here - and he maun 
never ken. Nane must ever ken that a warning cam the nicht to 
father!"

   "But they'll watch for us comin' in."

   "We maun rin back to Cuxhaven," said the quiet voice of Andrew, 
who had not yet spoken."

   "But ye canna," said Maggie; "the revenue cutter is on the 
watch, and when the mornin' comes will follow ye; and besides, 
hoo can ye get to Cuxhaven in this wind?"

   "Then what are we to do, lass?" said her father.

   "Dae, father? Dae what ye should dae - throw a' this poisonous 
stuff that has brought this ruin owerboard. Lichten yer boat as 
ye will lighten yer conscience, and come hame as ye went oot!"              

   The bruly ran swore a great oath. 

   "Nothing overboard shall be thrown. These belongs not to you 
but to Mendoza. If they be touched he closes on your boat and 
ruin it is for you!" Maggie saw her father hesitate, and feared 
that other counsels might prevail, so she spoke out as by an 
inspiration. There, amid the surges of the perilous seas, the 
daughter's heroic devotion and her passionate earnestness made 
a new calm in her father's life:

   "Father, dinna be deceived. Wi' this wind on shore, an' 
the revenue cutter ootside an' the dawn no' far off ye canna 
escape. Noo in the darkness ye can get rid o' the danger. 
Dinna lose a moment. The storm is somewhat lesser just enoo. 
Throw a' owerboard and come back to yer old self! What if we 
be ruined? We can work; and shall a' be happy yet!"

   Something seemed to rise in the old man's heart and give 
him strength. Without pause he said with a grand simplicity:

   "Ye're reet, lass, ye're reet! Haud up the casks, men, and 
stave them in!"

   Andrew and Neil rushed to his bedding. Mendoza's men protested, 
but were afraid to intervene, and one after another bales and casks 
were lifted on deck. The bales were tossed overboard and the heads 
of the casks stove in till the scuppers were alternately drenched 
with brandy and washed with the seas.

   In the midst of this, Maggie, knowing that if all were to 
be of any use she must be found at home in the morning, quietly 
pulled her boat as close as she dared, and slipping down the 
rope managed to clamber into it. Then she loosed the painter; 
and the wind and waves took her each instant farther and farther 
away. The sky over the horizon was brightening every instant, and 
there was a wild fear in her heart which not even the dull thud 
of the hammers as the casks were staved in could allay. She felt 
that it was a race against time, and her overexcited imagination 
multiplied her natural fear; her boat's head was to home, steering 
for where she guessed was the dim light on the cliff, towards which 
her heart yearned. She hauled the sheets close - as close as she 
dared, for now speed was everything if she was to get back unseen. 
Well she knew that Sailor Willy on his lonely vigil would be true 
to his trust, and that his eagle eye could not fail to note her 
entry when once the day had broken. In a fever of anxiety she kept 
her eye on the Girdleness light by which she had to steer, and 
with the rise and fall of every wave as she swept by them, threw 
the boat's head a point to the wind and let it fall away again.

   The storm had nearly spent itself, but there were still angry 
moments when the mist was swept in masses before fresh gusts. 
These, however, were fewer and fewer, and in a little while she 
ceased to heed them or even to look for them, and at last her 
eager eye began to discern through the storm the flickering 
lights of the little port. There came a moment when the tempest 
poured out the lees of its wrath in one final burst of energy, 
which wrapped the flying boat in a wraith of mist.

   And then the tempest swept onward, shoreward, with the broken 
mist showing white in the springing dawn like the wings of some 
messenger of coming peace.


                       Chapter IV

Matters looked serious enough on the Sea Gull when the time came 
in which rather the darkness began to disappear than the light 
to appear. Night and day have their own mysteries, and their 
nascence is as distant and as mysterious as the origin of life. 
The sky and the waters still seemed black, and the circle in 
which the little craft lived was as narrow as ever; but here and 
there in sky and on sea were faint streaks perceptible rather 
than distinguishable, as though swept thither by the trumpet 
blast of the messenger of the dawn. Mendoza's men did not stint 
their curses nor their threats, and Neil with passionate violence 
so assailed them in return that both MacWhirter and Andrew had 
to exercise their powers of restraint. But blood is hot, and the 
lives of lawless men are prone to make violence a habit; the two 
elder men were anxious that there should be no extension of the 
present bitter bickering. As for MacWhirter, his mind was in a 
whirl and tumult of mixed emotions. First came his anxiety for 
Maggie when she had set forth alone on the stormy sea with such 
inadequate equipment. Well the old fisherman knew the perils that 
lay before her in her effort to win the shore, and his heart 
was postively sick with anxiety when every effort of thought or
imagination concerning her ended in something like despair. In 
one way he was happier than he had been for many months; the 
impending blow had fallen, and though he was ruined it had come 
in such a time that his criminal intent had not been accomplished. 
Here again his anxiety regarding Maggie became intensified, for 
was it not to save him that she had set forth on her desperate 
enterprise. He groaned aloud as he thought of the price that he 
might yet have to pay - that he might have paid already, though 
he knew it not as yet - for the service which had saved him from 
the after-consequences of his sin. He dared not think more on the 
subject, for it would, he feared, madden him, and he must have 
other work to engross his thoughts. Thus it was that the danger 
of collision between Neil and Mendoza's men became an anodyne to 
his pain. He knew that a quarrel among seamen and under such 
conditions would be no idle thing, for they had all their knives, 
and with such hot blood on all sides none would hesitate to use 
them. The whole of the smuggled goods had by now been thrown 
overboard, the tobacco having gone the last, the bales having 
been broken up. So heavy had been the cargo that there was a new 
danger in that the boat was too much lightened. As Mendoza had 
intended that force as well as fraud was to aid this venture he 
had not stuck at trifles. There was no pretence of concealment 
and even the ballast had made way for cask and box and bale. The 
Sea Gull had been only partially loaded at Hamburg, but when out 
of sight of port her cargo had been completed from other boats 
which had followed, till, when she started for Buchan, she was 
almost a solid mass of contraband goods. Mendoza's men felt 
desperate at this hopeless failure of the venture; and as Neil, 
too, was desperate, in a different way, there was a grim 
possibility of trouble on board at any minute.

   The coming of the dawn was therefore a welcome relief, for 
it united - if only for a time - all on board to try to avert a 
common danger.

   Lighter and lighter grew the expanse of sea and sky, until 
over the universe seemed to spread a cool, pearly grey, against 
which every object seemed to stand starkly out. The smugglers 
were keenly on the watch, and they saw, growing more clearly each
instant out of the darkness, the black, low-lying hull, short 
funnel, and tapering spars of the revenue cutter about three or 
four miles off the starboard quarter. The preventive men seemed 
to see them at the same time, for there was a manifest stir on 
board, and the cutter's head was changed. Then MacWhirter knew 
it was necessary to take some bold course of action, for the Sea 
Gull lay between two fires, and he made up his mind to run then 
and there for Port Erroll.

   As the Sea Gull drew nearer in to shore the waves became more 
turbulent, for there is ever a more ordered succession in deep 
waters than where the onward rush is broken by the undulations of 
the shore. Minute by minute the dawn was growing brighter, and the 
shore was opening up. The Sea Gull, lightened of her load, could 
not with safety be thrown across the wind, and so the difficulty 
of her tacks was increased. The dawn was just shooting its first 
rays over the eastern sea when the final effort to win the little 
port came to be made.

   The harbour of Port Erroll is a tiny haven of refuge won 
from the jagged rocks that bound the eastern side of Cruden Bay. 
It is sheltered on the northern side by the cliff which runs as 
far as the Watter's Mou', and separated from the mouth of the 
Water of Cruden, with its waste of shifting sands, by a high wall 
of concrete. The harbour faces east, and its first basin is the 
smaller of the two, the larger opening sharply to the left a 
little way in. At the best of times it is not an easy matter to 
gain the harbour, for only when the tide has fairly risen is 
it available at all, and the rapid tide which runs up from the 
Scaurs makes in itself a difficulty at such times. The tide was 
now at three-quarters flood, so that in as far as water was 
concerned there was no difficulty; but the fierceness of the 
waves which sent up a wall of white water all along the cliffs 
looked ominous indeed.

   As the Sea Gull drew nearer to the shore, considerable 
commotion was caused on both sea and land. The revenue cutter 
dared not approach so close to the shore, studded as it was 
with sunken rocks, as did the lighter draughted coble; but her 
commander evidently did not mean to let this be to the advantage 
of the smuggler. A gun was fired to attract the authorities on 
shore, and signals were got ready to hoist.

   The crowd of strangers who thronged the little port had
instinctively hidden themselves behind rock and wall and boat, 
as the revelation of the dawn came upon them, so that the whole 
place presented the appearance of a warren when the rabbits 
are beginning to emerge after a temporary scare. There were not 
wanting, however, many who stood out in the open, affecting, 
with what nonchalance they could, a simple business interest 
at the little port. Sailor Willy was on the cliff between the 
guard-house and the Watter's Mou', where he had kept his vigil 
all the night long. As soon as possible after he had sent out 
his appeal for help the lieutenant had come over from Collieston 
with a boatman and three men, and these were now down on the 
quay waiting for the coming of the Sea Gull. When he had arrived, 
and had learned the state of things, the lieutenant, who knew 
of Willy Barrow's relations with the daughter of the suspected 
man, had kindly ordered him to watch the cliff, whilst he himself 
with the men would look after the port. When he had first given 
the order in the presence of the other coastguards, Willy had 
instinctively drawn himself up as though he felt that he, too, 
had come under suspicion, so the lieutenant took the earliest 
opportunity when they were alone of saying to Willy:

   "Barrow, I have arranged your duties as I have done, not 
by any means because I suspect that you would be drawn by your 
sympathies into any neglect of duty - I know you too well for 
that - but simply because I want to spare you pain in case 
things may be as we suspect!"

   Willy saluted and thanked him with his eyes as he turned
away, for he feared that the fullness of his heart might betray
him. The poor fellow was much overwrought. All night long he 
had paced the cliffs in the dull routine of his duty, with his
heart feeling like a lump of lead, and his brain on fire with 
fear. He knew from the wildness of Maggie's rush away from him 
that she was bent on some desperate enterprise, and as he had 
no clue to her definite intentions he could only imagine. He 
thought and thought until his brain almost began to reel with 
the intensity of his mental effort; and as he was so placed, 
tied to the stake of his duty, that he could speak with no 
one on the subject, he had to endure alone, and in doubt, 
the darkness of his soul, tortured alike by hopes and fears, 
through all the long night. At last, however, the pain 
exhausted itself, and doubt became its own anodyne. Despair 
has its calms - the backwaters of fears - where the tired 
imagination may rest awhile before the strife begins anew.

   With joy he saw that the storm was slackening with the 
coming of the dawn; and when the last fierce gust had swept by 
him, screaming through the rigging of the flagstaff overhead, 
and sweeping inland the broken fragments of the mist, he turned 
to the sea, now of a cool grey with the light of the coming dawn, 
and swept it far and wide with his glass. With gladness - and 
yet with an ache in his heart which he could not understand - 
he realised that there was in sight only one coble - the Sea 
Gull - he knew her well - running for the port, and farther 
out the hull and smoke, the light spars and swift lines of the 
revenue cutter, which was evidently following her. He strolled 
with the appearance of leisureliness, though his heart was 
throbbing, towards the cliff right over the little harbour, so 
that he could look down and see from close quarters all that 
went on. He could not but note the many strangers dispersed 
about, all within easy distance of a rush to the quay when the 
boat should land, or the way in which the lieutenant and his men 
seemed to keep guard over the whole place. As first the figures, 
the walls of the port, the cranes, the boats, and the distant 
headlands were silhouetted in black against the background of 
grey sea and grey sky; but as the dawn came closer each object 
began to stand out in its natural proportions. All kept growing 
clearer and yet clearer and more and more thoroughly outlined, 
till the moment came when the sun, shooting over the horizon, 
set every living thing whose eyes had been regulated to the 
strain of the darkness and the twilight blinking and winking 
in the glory of the full light of day.

   Eagerly he searched the faces of the crowd with his glass for 
Maggie, but he could not see her anywhere, and his heart seemed 
to sink within him, for well he knew that it must be no ordinary 
cause which kept Maggie from being one of the earliest on the 
look-out for her father. Closer and closer came the Sea Gull, 
running for the port with a speed and recklessness that set both 
the smugglers and the preventive men all agog. Such haste and 
such indifference to danger sprang, they felt, from no common 
cause, and they all came to the conclusion that the boat, delayed 
by the storm, discovered by the daylight, and cut off by the 
revenue cutter, was making a desperate push for success in her 
hazard. And so all, watchers and watched, braced themselves for 
what might come about. Amongst the groups moved the tall figure 
of Mendoza, whispering and pointing, but keeping carefully hidden 
from the sight of the coastguards. He was evidently inciting them 
to some course from which they held back.

   Closer and closer came the Sea Gull, lying down to the 
scuppers as she tacked; lightened as she was she made more 
leeway than was usual to so crank a boat. At last she got her 
head in the right direction for a run in, and, to the amazement 
of all who saw her, came full tilt into the outer basin, and, 
turning sharply round, ran into the inner basin under bare poles. 
There was not one present, smuggler or coastguard, who did not 
set down the daring attempt as simply suicidal. In a few seconds 
the boat stuck on the sandbank accumulated at the western end 
of the basin and stopped, her bows almost touching the side of 
the pier. The coastguards had not expected any such manoeuvre, 
and had taken their place on either side of the entrance to 
the inner basin, so that it took them a few seconds to run the 
length of the pier and come opposite the boat. The crowd of the 
smugglers and the smugglers' friends was so great that just as 
Neil and his brother began to shove out a plank from the bows to 
step ashore there was so thick a cluster round the spot that the
lieutenant as he came could not see what was going on. Some 
little opposition was made to his passing through the mass of
people, which was getting closer every instant, but his men
closed up behind, and together they forced a way to the front
before any one from the Sea Gull could spring on shore. A sort 
of angry murmur - that deep undertone which marks the passion 
of a mass - arose, and the lieutenant, recognising its import, 
faced round like lightning, his revolver pointed straight in 
the faces of the crowd, whilst the men with him drew their 
cutlasses.

   To Sailor Willy this appearance of action gave a relief from
almost intolerable pain. He was in feverish anxiety about Maggie, 
but he could do nothing - nothing; and to an active and resolute 
man this feeling is in itself the worst of pain. His heart was 
simply breaking with suspense, and so it was that the sight of 
drawn weapons, in whatever cause, came like an anodyne to his 
tortured imagination. The flash of the cutlasses woke in him the 
instinct of action, and with a leaping heart he sprang down the 
narrow winding path that led to the quay.

   Before the lieutenant's pistol the crowd fell back. It was 
not that they were afraid - for cowardice is pretty well unknown 
in Buchan - but authority, and especially in arms, has a special 
force with law-breakers. But the smugglers did not mean going 
back altogether now that their booty was so close to them, 
and the two bodies stood facing each other when Sailor Willy 
came upon the scene and stood beside the officers. Things were 
looking pretty serious when the resonant voice of MacWhirter 
was heard:

   "What d'ye mean, men, crowdin' on the officers. Stand back,
there, and let the coastguards come aboard an they will. There's 
naught here that they mayn't see."

   The lieutenant turned and stepped on the plank - which Neil 
had by this time shoved on shore - and went on board, followed by 
two of his men, the other remaining with the boatman and Willy 
Barrow on the quay. Neil went straight to the officer, and said:

   "I want to go ashore at once! Search me an ye will!" He spoke 
so rudely that the officer was angered, and said to one of the 
men beside him:

   "Put your hands over him and let him go," adding, sotto 
voce, "He wants a lesson in manners!" The man lightly passed 
his hands over him to see that he had nothing contraband about 
him, and, being satisfied on the point, stood back and nodded 
to his officer, and Neil sprang ashore, and hurried off towards 
the village.

   Willy had, by this time, a certain feeling of relief, for 
he had been thinking, and he knew that MacWhirter would not have 
been so ready to bring the coastguards on board if he had any 
contraband with him. Hope did for him what despair could not, for 
as he instinctively turned his eyes over the waste of angry sea, 
for an instant he did not know if it were the blood in his eyes 
or, in reality, the red of the dawn which had shot up over the 
eastern horizon.

   Mendoza's men, having been carefully searched by one of the 
coastguards, came sullenly on shore and went to the back of the 
crowd, where their master, scowling and white-faced, began 
eagerly to talk with them in whispers. MacWhirter and his elder 
son busied themselves with apparent nonchalance in the needful 
matters of the landing, and the crowd seemed holding back for a 
spring. The suspense of all was broken by the incoming of a boat 
sent off from the revenue cutter, which, driven by four sturdy 
oarsmen, and steered by the commander himself, swept into the 
outer basin of the harbour, tossing amongst the broken waves. In 
the comparative shelter of the wall it turned, and driving into 
the inner basin pulled up on the slip beyond where the Sea Gull 
lay. The instant the boat touched, six bluejackets sprang ashore, 
followed by the commander, and all seven men marched quietly but 
resolutely to the quay opposite the Sea Gull's bow. The oarsmen 
followed, when they had hauled their boat up on the slip. The 
crowd now abandoned whatever had been its intention, and fell 
back looking and muttering thunder.

   By this time the lieutenant was satisfied that the coble 
contained nothing that was contraband, and, telling its master so, 
stepped on shore just as Neil, with his face white as a sheet, 
and his eyes blazing, rushed back at full speed. He immediately 
attacked Sailor Willy:

   "What hae ye dune wi' ma sister Maggie?"

   He answered as quietly as he could, although there shot through 
his heart a new pain, a new anxiety:

   "I know naught of her. I haven't seen her since last night, 
when Alice MacDonald was being married. Is she not at home?"

   "Dinna ye ken damned weel that she's no'. Why did ye send her 
oot?" And he looked at him with the menace of murder in his eyes. 
The lieutenant saw from the looks of the two men that something 
was wrong, and asked Neil shortly:

   "Where did you see her last?" Neil was going to make some angry 
reply, but in an instant Mendoza stepped forward, and in a loud 
voice gave instruction to one of his men who had been on board the 
Sea Gull to take charge of her, as she was his under a bill of 
sale. This gave Neil time to think, and his answer came sullenly:

   "Nane o' ye're business - mind yer ain affairs!" MacWhirter,
when he had seen Neil come running back, had realised the worst, 
and leaned on the taffrail of the boat, groaning. Mendoza's man 
sprang on board, and, taking him roughly by the shoulder, said:

   "Come, clear out here. This boat is to Mendoza; get away!" 
The old man was so overcome with his feelings regarding Maggie 
that he made no reply, but quietly, with bent form, stepped on 
the plank and gained the quay. Willy Barrow rushed forward and 
took him by the hand and whispered to him: 

   "What does he mean?"

   "He means," said the old man in a low, strained voice, "that
for me an' him, an' to warn us she cam oot last nicht in the
storm in a wee bit boat, an' that she is no' to her hame!" and
he groaned. Willy was smitten with horror. This, then, was 
Maggie's high and desperate purpose when she left him. He knew 
now the meaning of those despairing words, and the darkness of 
the grave seemed to close over his soul. He moaned out to the old 
man: "She did not tell me she was going. I never knew it. O my 
God!" The old man, with the protective instinct of the old to the 
young, laid his hand on his shoulder, as he said to him in a 
broken voice:

   "A ken it, lad! A ken it weel! She tell't me sae hersel! The
sin is a' wi' me, though you, puir lad, must e'en bear yer share
o' the pain!" The commander said quietly to the lieutenant:

   "Looks queer, don't it - the coastguard and the smuggler
whispering?"

   "All right," came the answer, "I know Barrow; he is as true as 
steel, but he's engaged to the old man's daughter. But I gather 
there's something queer going on this morning about her. I'll find 
out. Barrow," he added, calling Willy to him, "what is it about 
MacWhirter's daughter?"

   "I don't know for certain, sir, but I fear she was out at
sea last night."                                       .

   "At sea," broke in the commander; "at sea last night - how?"

   "She was in a bit fishin'-boat," broke in MacWhirter. 
"Neighbours, hae ony o' ye seen her this mornin'? 'Twas ma son 
Andra's boat, that he keeps i' the Downans!" - another name for 
the Watter's Mou'. A sad silence that left the angry roar of 
the waves as they broke on the rocks and on the long strand in 
full possession was the only reply.

   "Is the boat back in the Watter's Mou'?" asked the lieutenant
sharply.

   "No." said a fisherman. "A cam up jist noo past the Barley
Mill, an' there's nae boat there."

   "Then God help her, an' God forgie me," said MacWhirter, 
tearing off his cap and holding up his hands, "for A've killed
her - her that sae loved her auld father, that she went oot 
alane in a bit boat i' the storm i' the nicht to save him frae
the consequence o' his sin." Willy Barrow groaned, and the
lieutenant turned to him: "Heart, man, heart! God won't let
a brave girl like that be lost. That's the lass for a sailor's 
wife. 'Twill be all right - you'll be proud of her yet!"

   But Sailor Willy only groaned despite the approval of his
conscience; his words of last night came back to him. "Ye're no 
fit wife for me!" Now the commander spoke out to MacWhirter:

   "When did you see her last?"

   "Aboot twa o'clock i' the mornin'."

   "Where?"

   "Aboot twenty miles off the Scaurs."

   "How did she come to leave you?"

   "She pulled the boat that she cam in alongside the coble, an' 
got in by hersel - the last I saw o' her she had hoisted her sail 
an' was running nor'west . . . But A'll see her nae mair - a's 
ower wi' the puir, brave lass - an' wi' me, tae, that killed 
her - a's ower the noo - a's ower!" and he covered his face with 
his hands and sobbed. The commander said kindly enough, but with 
a stern gravity that there was no mistaking:

   "Do I take it rightly that the girl went out in the storm to
warn you?"

   "Ay! Puir lass - 'twas an ill day that made me put sic a task
on her - God forgie me!" and there and then he told them all of 
her gallant deed.

   The commander turned to the lieutenant, and spoke in the quick, 
resolute, masterful accent of habitual command:

   "I shall leave you the bluejackets to help - send your men all 
out, and scour every nook and inlet from Kirkton to Boddam. Out 
with all the lifeboats on the coast! And you, men!" he turned to 
the crowd, "turn out, all of you, to help! Show that there's some 
man's blood in you, to atone if you can for the wrong that sent 
this young girl out in a storm to save her father from you and 
your like!" Here he turned again to the lieutenant, "Keep a sharp 
eye on that man - Mendoza, and all his belongings. We'll attend 
to him later on: I'll be back before night."

   "Where are you off to, Commander?"

   "I'm going to scour the sea in the track of the storm where 
that gallant lass went last night. A brave girl that dared what 
she did for her father's sake is not to be lost without an effort; 
and, by God, she shan't lack it whilst I hold Her Majesty's 
command! Boatswain, signal the cutter full steam up - no, you! 
We mustn't lose time, and the boatswain comes with me. To your 
oars, men!"

   The seamen gave a quick, sharp "Hurrah!" as they sprang to 
their places, whilst the man of the shore party to whom the 
order had been given climbed the sea-wall and telegraphed the 
needful orders; the crowd seemed to catch the enthusiasm of the 
moment, and scattered right and left to make search along the 
shore. In a few seconds the revenue boat was tossing on the waves
outside the harbour, the men laying to their work as they drove 
her along, their bending oars keeping time to the swaying body of 
the commander, who had himself taken the tiller. The lieutenant 
said to Willy with thoughtful kindness:

   "Where would you like to work on the search? Choose which part 
you will!" Willy instinctively touched his cap as he answered 
sadly:

   "I should like to watch here, sir, if I may. She would make
straight for the Watter's Mou'!"


                         Chapter V

The search for the missing girl was begun vigorously, and carried 
on thoroughly and with untiring energy. The Port Erroll lifeboat 
was got out and proceeded up coast, and a telegram was sent to 
Kirkton to get out the lifeboat there, and follow up the shore to 
Port Erroll. From either place a body of men with ropes followed 
on shore keeping pace with the boat's progress. In the meantime 
the men of each village and hamlet all along the shore of Buchan 
from Kirkton to Boddam began a systematic exploration of all the 
openings on the coast. Of course there were some places where 
no search could at present be made. The Bullers, for instance, 
was well justifying its name with the wild turmoil of waters that 
fretted and churned between its rocky walls, and the neighbourhood 
of the Twa Een was like a seething caldron. At Dunbuy, a great 
sheet of foam, perpetually renewed by the rush and recoil of the 
waves among the rocks, lay like a great white blanket over the 
inlet, and effectually hid any flotsam or jetsam that might have 
been driven thither. But on the high cliffs around these places, 
on every coign of vantage, sat women and children, who kept keen 
watch for aught that might develop. Every now and again a shrill 
cry would bring a rush to the place and eager eyes would follow 
the pointing hand of the watcher who had seen some floating 
matter; but in every case a few seconds and a little dispersing 
of the shrouding foam put an end to expectation. Throughout that
day the ardour of the searchers never abated. Morning had come 
rosy and smiling over the waste of heaving waters, and the sun 
rose and rose till its noonday rays beat down oppressively. But 
Willy Barrow never ceased from his lonely vigil on the cliff. At 
dinner-time a good-hearted woman brought him some food, and in 
kindly sympathy sat by him in silence, whilst he ate it. At first 
it seemed to him that to eat at all was some sort of wrong to 
Maggie, and he felt that to attempt it would choke him. But after 
a few mouthfuls the human need in him responded to the occasion, 
and he realised how much he wanted food. The kindly neighbour 
then tried to cheer him with a few words of hope, and a many 
words of Maggie's worth, and left him, if not cheered, at least 
sustained for what he had to endure.

   All day long his glass ranged the sea in endless, ever-baffled 
hope. He saw the revenue boat strike away at first towards 
Girdleness, and then turn and go out to where Maggie had left 
the Sea Gull; and then under full steam churn her way north-west 
through the fretted seas. Now and again he saw boats, far and 
near, pass on their way; and as they went through that wide belt 
of sea where Maggie's body might be drifting with the wreckage of 
her boat, his heart leaped and fell again under stress of hope 
and despair. The tide fell lower and ever lower, till the waves 
piling into the estuary roared among the rocks that paved the 
Watter's Mou'. Again and again he peered down from every rocky 
point in fear of seeing amid the turmoil - what, he feared to 
think. There was ever before his eyes the figure of the woman he 
loved, spread out rising and falling with the heaving waves, her 
long hair tossing wide and making an aureole round the upturned 
white face. Turn where he would, in sea or land, or in the white
clouds of the summer sky, that image was ever before him, as 
though it had in some way burned into his iris.

   Later in the afternoon, as he stood beside the crane, where he 
had met Maggie the night before, he saw Neil coming towards him, 
and instinctively moved from the place, for he felt that he would 
not like to meet on that spot, for ever to be hallowed in his mind, 
Maggie's brother with hatred in his heart. So he moved slowly to 
meet him, and when he had got close to the flagstaff waited till 
he should come up, and swept once again the wide horizon with his 
glass - in vain. Neil, too, had begun to slow his steps as he 
drew nearer. Slower and slower he came, and at last stood close 
to the man whom in the morning he had spoken to with hatred and 
murder in his heart.

   All the morning Neil had worked with a restless, feverish 
actively, which was the wonder of all. He had not stayed with 
the searching party with whom he had set out; their exhaustive 
method was too slow for him, and he soon distanced them, and 
alone scoured the whole coast as far as Murdoch Head. Then 
in almost complete despair, for his mind was satisfied that 
Maggie's body had never reached that part of the shore, he had 
retraced his steps almost at a run, and, skirting the sands 
of Cruden Bay, on whose wide expanse the beakers still rolled 
heavily and roared loudly, he glanced among the jagged rocks 
that lay around Whinnyfold and stretched under the water away 
to the Scaurs. Then he came back again, and the sense of 
desolation complete upon him moved his passionate heart to 
sympathy and pity. It is when the soul within us feels the 
narrow environments of our selfishness that she really begins 
to spread her wings.

   Neil walked over the sandhills along Cruden Bay like a man 
in a dream. With a sailor's habit he watched the sea, and now 
and again had his attention attracted by the drifting masses of 
seaweed torn from its rocky bed by the storm. In such tossing 
black masses he sometimes thought Maggie's body might lie, but 
his instinct of the sea was too true to be long deceived. And 
then he began to take himself to task. Hitherto he had been too 
blindly passionate to be able to think of anything but his own 
trouble; but now, despite what he could do, the woe-stricken 
face of Sailor Willy would rise before his inner eye like the 
embodiment or the wraith of a troubled conscience. When once 
this train of argument had been started, the remorseless logic 
which is the mechanism of the spirit of conscience went on its 
way unerringly. Well he knew it was the ill-doing of which he 
had a share, and not the duty that Willy owed, that took his 
sister out alone on the stormy sea. He knew from her own lips 
that Willy had neither sent her nor even knew of her going, 
and the habit of fair play which belonged to his life began 
to exert an influence. The first sign of his change of mind 
was the tear which welled up in his eye and rolled down his 
cheek. "Poor Maggie! Poor Willy!" he murmured to himself, 
half unconsciously, "A'll gang to him an' tak it a' back!" 
With this impulse on him he quickened his steps, and never 
paused till he saw Willy Barrow before him, spy-glass to eye, 
searching the sea for any sign of his lost love. Then his 
fears, and the awkwardness which a man feels at such a moment, 
no matter how poignant may be the grief which underlies it, 
began to trip him up. When he stood beside Willy Barrow, he 
said, with what bravery he could:

   "I tak it a' back, Sailor Willy! Ye werena to blame! It was oor 
daein'! Will ye forgie me?" Willy turned and impulsively grasped 
the hand extended to him. In the midst of his overwhelming pain 
this was some little gleam of sunshine. He had himself just 
sufficient remorse to make the assurance of his innocence by 
another grateful. He knew well that if he had chosen to sacrifice 
his duty Maggie would never have gone out to sea, and though it 
did not even occur to him to repent of doing his duty, the mere 
tempetation - the mere struggle against it, made a sort of 
foothold where flying remorse might for a moment rest. When the 
eyes of the two men met, Willy felt a new duty rise within his. 
He had always loved Neil, who was younger than himself, and was 
Maggie's brother, and he could not but see the look of anguish in 
the eyes that were so like Maggie's. He saw there something which 
in one way transcended his own pain, and made him glad that he
had not on his soul the guilt of treachery to his duty. Not for 
the wide world would he have gazed into Maggie's eyes with such a 
look as that in his own. And yet - and yet - there came back to 
him with an over-powering flood of anguish the thought that, 
though the darkness had mercifully hidden it, Maggie's face, 
after she had tempted him, had had in it something of the same 
expression. It is a part of the penalty of being human that we 
cannot forbid the coming of thoughts, but it is a glory of 
humanity that we can wrestle with them and overcome them. Quick 
on the harrowing memory of Maggie's shame came the thought of 
Maggie's heroic self-devotion: her true spirit had found a way 
out of shame and difficulty, and the tribute of the lieutenant, 
"That's the lass for a sailor's wife!" seemed to ring in Willy's 
ears. As far as death was concerned, Willy Barrow did not fear it 
for himself, and how could he feel the fear for another. Such 
semblance of fear as had been in his distress was based on the
selfishness which is a part of man's love, and in this wild hour 
of pain and distress became a thing of naught. All this reasoning, 
all this sequence of emotions, passed in a few seconds, and, as 
it seemed to him all at once, Willy Barrow broke out crying with 
the abandon which marks strong men when spiritual pain breaks 
down the barriers of their pride. Men of Willy's class seldom 
give way to their emotions. The prose of life is too continuous 
to allow of any habit of prolonged emotional indulgence; the 
pendulum swings back from fact to fact and things go on as before. 
So it was with Sailor Willy. His spasmodic grief was quick as 
well as fierce, like an April shower; and in a few seconds he 
had regained his calm. But the break, though but momentary, had 
relieved his pent-up feelings, and his heart beat more calmly for 
it. Then some of the love which he had for Maggie went out to her 
brother, and as he saw that the pain in his face did not lessen, 
a great pity overcame him and he tried to comfort Neil.

   "Don't grieve, man. Don't grieve. I know well you'd give your 
heart's blood for Maggie" - he faltered as he spoke her name, but 
with a great gulp went on bravely: "There's your father - her 
father, we must try and comfort him. Maggie," here he lifted his 
cap reverently, "is with God! We, you and I, and all, must so bear 
ourselves that she shall not have died in vain." To Sailor Willy's 
tear-blurred eyes, as he looked upward, it seemed as if the great 
white gull which perched as he spoke on the yard of the flagstaff 
over his head was in some way an embodiment of the spirit of the 
lost girl, and, like the lightning phantasmagoria of a dream, 
there flitted across his mind many an old legend and eerie belief 
gained among the wolds and barrows of his Yorkshire home.

   There was not much more to be said between the men, for they 
understood each other, and men of their class are not prone to 
speak more than is required. They walked northwards, and for a 
long time they stood together on the edge of the cliff, now and 
again gazing seawards, and ever and anon to where below their 
feet and falling tide was fretting and churning amongst the 
boulders at the entrance of the Watter's Mou'.

   Neil was unconsciously watching his companion's face and
following his thoughts, and presently said, as though in answer
to something that had gone before: "Then ye think she'll drift
in here, if onywhere?" Willy started as though he had been
struck, for there seemed a positive brutality in the way of
putting his own secret belief. He faced Neil quickly, but there
was nothing in his face of any brutal thought. On the contrary, 
the lines of his face were so softened that all his likeness to 
his sister stood out so markedly as to make the heart of her 
lover ache with a fresh pang - a new sense, not of loss, but of 
what he had lost. Neil was surprised at the manner of his look, 
and his mind working back gave him the clue. All at once he 
broke out:

   "O Willy mon, we'll never see her again! Never! never! till
the sea gies up its dead; what can we dae, mon? what can we dae? 
what can we dae?"

   Again there was a new wrench to Sailor Willy's heart. Here
were almost Maggie's very words of the night before, spoken in 
the same despairing tone, in the same spot, and by one who was 
not only her well-beloved brother, but who was, as he stood in 
this abandonment of his grief, almost her living image. However, 
he did not know what to say, and he could do nothing but only 
bear in stolid patient misery the woes that came upon him. He 
did all that could be done - nothing - but stood in silent 
sympathy and waited for the storm in the remorseful young man's 
soul to pass. After a few minutes Neil recovered somewhat, and, 
pulling himself together, said to Willy with what bravery he 
could:

   "A'll gang look after father. A've left him ower lang as't is!"
The purpose of Maggie's death was beginning to bear fruit already.

   He went across the field straight towards where his father's
cottage stood under the brow of the slope towards the Water of 
Cruden. Sailor Willy watched him go with sadness, for anything 
that had been close to Maggie was dear to him, and Neil's 
presence had been in some degree an alleviation of his pain.

   During the hours that followed he had one gleam of pleasure - 
something that moved him strangely in the midst of his pain. Early 
in the morning the news of Maggie's loss had been taken to the 
Castle, and all its household had turned out to aid vigorously in 
the search. In his talk with the lieutenant and his men, and from 
the frequent conversation of the villagers, the Earl had gathered 
pretty well the whole truth of what had occurred. Maggie had been 
a favourite with the ladies of the Castle, and it was as much on 
her account as his own that the Mastership of the Harbour had 
been settled prospectively on MacWhirter. That this arrangement 
was to be upset since the man had turned smuggler was taken for
granted by all, and already rumour and surmise were busy in 
selecting a successor to the promise. The Earl listened but said 
nothing. Later on in the day, however, he strolled up the cliff 
where Willy paced on guard, and spoke with him. He had a sincere 
regard and liking for the fine young fellow, and when he saw his 
silent misery his heart went out to him. He tried to comfort him 
with hopes, but, finding that there was no response in Willy's 
mind, confined himself to praise of Maggie. Willy listened 
eagerly as he spoke of her devotion, her bravery, her noble 
spirit, that took her out on such a mission; and the words fell 
like drops of balm on the seared heart of her lover. But the 
bitterness of his loss was too much that he should be altogether 
patient, and he said presently:

   "And all in vain! All in vain! she lost, and her father ruined,
his character gone as well as all his means of livelihood - and
all in vain! God might be juster than to let such a death as hers 
be in vain!"

   "No, not in vain!" he answered solemnly, "such a deed as 
hers is never wrought in vain. God sees and hears, and His 
hand is strong and sure. Many a man in Buchan for many a year 
to come will lead an honester life for what she has done; 
and many a woman will try to learn her lesson in patience and 
self-devotion. God does not in vain put such thoughts into 
the minds of His people, or into their hearts the noble 
bravery to carry them out."

   Sailor Willy groaned. "Don't think me ungrateful, my lord,"
he said, "for your kind words - but I'm half wild with trouble,
and my heart is sore. Maybe it is as you say - and yet - and yet 
the poor lass went out to save her father and here he is, ruined 
in means, in character, in prospects - for who will employ him 
now just when he most wants it. Everything is gone - and she 
gone too that could have helped and comforted him!"

   As he spoke there shot through the mind of his comforter
a thought followed by a purpose not unworthy of that ancestor, 
whose heroism and self-devotion won an earldom with an ox-yoke 
as its crest, and the circuit of a hawk's flight as its dower. 
There was a new tone in the Earl's voice as he spoke:

   "You mean about the harbour-mastership! Don't let that distress 
you, my poor lad. MacWhirter has lapsed a bit, but he has always 
borne an excellent character, and from all I hear he was sorely 
tempted. And, after all, he hasn't done - at least completed - any 
offence. Oh!" and here he spoke solemnly, "poor Maggie's warning 
did come in time. Her work was not in vain, though God help us 
all! she and those that loved her paid a heavy price for it. But 
even if MacWhirter had committed the offence, and it lay in my 
power, I should try to prove that her noble devotion was not 
without its purpose - or its reward. It is true that I might not 
altogether trust MacWhirter until, at least, such time as by good 
service he had re-established his character. But I would and 
shall trust the father of Maggie MacWhirter, that gave her life 
for him; and well I know that there isn't an honest man or woman 
in Buchan that won't say the same. He shall be the harbourmaster 
if he will. We shall find in time that he has reared again the 
love and respect of all men. That will be Maggie's monument; and 
a noble one too in the eyes of God and of men!"

   He grasped Willy's hand in his own strong one, and the hearts 
of both men, the gentle and the simple, went out each to the other, 
and became bound together as men's hearts do when touched with 
flame of any kind.

   When he was alone Willy felt somehow more easy in his mind. 
The bitterest spirit of all is woe - the futility of Maggie's 
sacrifice - was gone, exorcised by the hopeful words and kind 
act of the Earl, and the resilience of his manhood began to act.

   And now there came another distraction to his thoughts - an 
ominous weather change. It had grown colder as the day went on, 
but now the heat began to be oppressive, and there was a deadly 
stillness in the air; it was manifest that another storm was 
at hand. The sacrifice of the night had not fully appeased the 
storm-gods. Somewhere up in that Northern Unknown, where the 
Fates weave their web of destiny, a tempest was brewing which 
would soon boil over. Darker and darker grew the sky, and more 
still and silent and oppressive grew the air, till the cry of a 
sea-bird or the beating of the waves upon the rocks came as 
distinct and separate things, as though having no counterpart 
in the active world. Towards sunset the very electricity in the 
air made all animate nature so nervous that men and women could 
not sit quiet, but moved restlessly. Susceptible women longed 
to scream out and vent their feelings, as did the cattle in 
the meadows with their clamorous lowing, or the birds wheeling 
restlessly aloft with articulate cries. Willy Barrow stuck 
steadfastly to his post. He had some feeling - some presentiment 
that there would soon be a happening - what, he knew not; but, 
as all his thoughts were of Maggie, it must surely be of her. It
might have been that the thunderous disturbance wrought on a 
system overtaxed almost beyond human endurance, for it was two 
whole nights since he had slept. Or it may have been that the 
recoil from despair was acting on his strong nature in the way 
that drives men at times to desperate deeds, when they rush into 
the thick of battle, and, fighting, die. Or it may simply have 
been that the seaman in him spoke through all the ways and 
offices of instinct and habit, and that with the foreknowledge 
of coming stress woke the power that was to combat with it. For 
great natures of the fighting kind move with their surroundings, 
and the spirit of the sailor grew with the storm pressure whose 
might he should have to brave.

   Down came the storm in one wild, frenzied burst. All at once 
the waters seemed to rise, throwing great sheets of foam from 
the summit of the lifting waves. The wind whistled high and low, 
and screamed as it swept through the rigging of the flagstaff. 
Flashes of lightning and rolling thunderclaps seemed to come 
together, so swift their succession. The rain fell in torrents, 
so that within a few moments the whole earth seemed one filmy 
sheet, shining in the lightning flashes that rent the black 
clouds, and burn and rill and runlet roared with rushing water. 
All through the hamlet men and women, even the hardiest, fled 
to shelter - all save the one who paced the rocks above the 
Watter's Mou', peering as he had done for many an hour down 
into the depths below him in the pauses of his seaward glance. 
Something seemed to tell him that Maggie was coming closer to 
him. He could feel her presence in the air and the sea; and the 
memory of that long, passionate kiss, which had made her his, 
came back, not as a vivid recollection, but as something of the 
living present. To and fro he paced between the flagstaff and 
the edge of the rocks; but each turn he kept further and further 
from the flagstaff, as though some fatal fascination was holding 
him to the Watter's Mou'. He saw the great waves come into the 
cove tumbling and roaring; dipping deep under the lee of the 
Ship's Starn in wide patches of black, which in the dark silence 
of their onward sweep stood out in strong contrast to the white
turmoil of the churning waters under his feet. Every now and 
again a wave greater than all its fellows - what fishermen call
the "sailor's wave" - would ride in with all the majesty of 
resistless power, shutting out for a moment the jagged whiteness 
of the submerged rocks, and sweeping up the cove as though the 
bringer of some royal message from the sea.

   As one of these great waves rushed in, Willy's heart beat
loudly, and for a second he looked around as though for some
voice, from whence he knew not, which was calling to him. Then 
he looked down and saw, far below him, tossed high upon the 
summit of the wave, a mass that in the gloom of the evening 
and the storm looker like a tangle of wreckage - spar and sail 
and rope - twirling in the rushing water round a dead woman, 
whose white face was set in an aureole of floating hair. 
Without a word, but with the bound of a panther, Willy Barrow 
sprang out on the projecting point of rock, and plunged down 
into the rushing wave whence he could meet that precious 
wreckage and grasp it tight.


Down in the village the men were talking in groups as the chance 
of the storm had driven them to shelter. In the rocket-house 
opposite the Salmon Fisher's store had gathered a big cluster, 
and they were talking eagerly of all that had gone by. Presently 
one of them said:

   "Men, oughtn't some o' us to gang abeen the rocks and bide
a wee wi' Sailor Willy? The puir lad is nigh daft wi' his loss,
an 'a wee bit companionship wouldna be bad for him." To which 
a sturdy youth answered as he stepped out:

   "A'l go bide wi' him. It must be main lonely for him in the
guard-house the nicht. An' when he's relieved, as A hear he is 
to be, by Michael Watson ower frae Whinnyfold, A'll gang wi' 
him or tak him hame wi' me. Mither'll be recht glad to thole 
for him!" and drawing his oilskin closer round his neck he went 
out in the storm. As he walked up the path to the cliff the 
storm seemed to fade away - the clouds broke, and through the 
wet mist came gleams of fading twilight; and when he looked 
eastwards from the cliff the angry sea was all that was of 
storm, for in the sky was every promise of fine weather to 
come. He went straight to the guard-house and tried to open 
the door, but it was locked; then he went to the side and 
looked in. There was just sufficient light to see that the 
place was empty. So he went along the cliff looking for Willy. 
It was now light enough to see all round, for the blackness 
of the sky overhead had passed, the heavy clouds being swept 
away by the driving wind; but nowhere could he see any trace 
of the man he sought. He went all along the cliff up the 
Watter's Mou', till, following the downward trend of the rock, 
and splashing a way through the marsh - now like a quagmire, 
so saturated was it with the heavy rainfall - he came to 
the shallows opposite the Barley Mill. Here he met a man 
from The Bullers, who had come along by the Castle, and him 
he asked if he had seen Willy Barrow on his way. The decidedly 
negative answer "A've seen nane. It's nae a night for ony to 
be oot than can bide wi'in!" made him think that all might not 
be well with Sailor Willy, and so he went back again on his 
search, peering into every hole and cranny as he went. At the 
flagstaff he met some of his companions, who, since the storm 
had passed, had come to look for weather signs and to see 
what the sudden tempest might have brought about. When they 
heard that there was no sign of the coastguard they separated, 
searching for him, and shouting lest he might have fallen 
anywhere and hear their voices.

   All that night they searched, for each minute made it more 
apparent that all was not well with him; but they found no sign.
The waves still beat into the Watter's Mou' with violence, for
though the storm had passed the sea was a wide-stretching mass
of angry waters, and curling white crowned every wave. But with 
the outgoing tide the rocky bed of the cove broke up the waves, 
and they roared sullenly as they washed up the estuary.

   In the grey of the morning a fisher-boy rushed up to a knot
of men who were clustered round the guard-house and called to 
them:

   "There's somethin' wollopin' aboot i' the shallows be the 
Barley Mill! Come an' get it oot! It looks like some ane!" 
So there was a rush made to the place. When they got to the
islands of sea-grass the ebbing tide had done its work, and
stranded the "something" which had rolled amid the shallows.

   There, on the very spot whence the boat had set sail on its
warning errand, lay its wreckage, and tangled in it the body
of the noble girl who had steered it - her brown hair floating
wide and twined round the neck of Sailor Willy, who held her 
tight in his dead arms.

   The requiem of the twain was the roar of the breaking waves 
and the screams of the white birds that circled round the Watter's 
Mou'.


                         *End*
